<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en">
<head>




























</head>
<body class="tei"><div class="tei tei-text" style="margin-bottom: 2.00em; margin-top: 2.00em" lang="en"><div class="tei tei-front" style="margin-bottom: 6.00em; margin-top: 2.00em"><div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 5.00em; margin-top: 5.00em"><div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em"><pre class="pre tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 3.00em; margin-top: 3.00em"/>
</div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 5.00em; margin-top: 5.00em"/>
<hr class="page"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 5.00em; margin-top: 5.00em">
<p class="tei tei-p" style="text-align: center; margin-bottom: 1.73em"><span style="font-size: 173%">Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="text-align: center; margin-bottom: 1.20em"><span style="font-size: 120%">A Revised Translation</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="text-align: center; margin-bottom: 1.20em"><span style="font-size: 120%">With Introduction, Life, and Notes</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="text-align: center; margin-bottom: 1.20em"><span style="font-size: 120%">By</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="text-align: center; margin-bottom: 1.44em"><span style="font-size: 144%">A. M. Sellar</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="text-align: center; margin-bottom: 1.20em"><span style="font-size: 120%">Late Vice-Principal of Lady Margaret Hall,
        Oxford</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="text-align: center; margin-bottom: 1.00em">London</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="text-align: center; margin-bottom: 1.00em">George Bell and Sons</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="text-align: center; margin-bottom: 1.00em">1907</p>
</div>
<hr class="page"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 5.00em; margin-top: 5.00em">
<h1 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 3.46em; margin-top: 3.46em">
<span style="font-size: 173%">Contents</span></h1>
<ul class="tei tei-index tei-index-toc">
<li><a href="#toc1" class="pginternal">Editor's Preface</a></li>
<li><a href="#toc3" class="pginternal">Introduction</a></li>
<li><a href="#toc5" class="pginternal">Life Of Bede</a></li>
<li><a href="#toc7" class="pginternal">Errata</a></li>
<li><a href="#toc9" class="pginternal">Preface</a></li>
<li><a href="#toc11" class="pginternal">Book I</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc13" class="pginternal">Chap. I. Of the
          Situation of Britain and Ireland, and of their ancient
          inhabitants.</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc15" class="pginternal">Chap. II. How Caius
          Julius Caesar was the first Roman that came into Britain.</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc17" class="pginternal">Chap. III. How
          Claudius, the second of the Romans who came into Britain, brought
          the islands Orcades into subjection to the Roman empire; and
          Vespasian, sent by him, reduced the Isle of Wight under the
          dominion of the Romans.</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc19" class="pginternal">Chap. IV. How Lucius,
          king of Britain, writing to Pope Eleutherus, desired to be made a
          Christian.</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc21" class="pginternal">Chap. V. How the
          Emperor Severus divided from the rest by a rampart that part of
          Britain which had been recovered.</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc23" class="pginternal">Chap. VI. Of the
          reign of Diocletian, and how he persecuted the Christians.</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc25" class="pginternal">Chap. VII. The
          Passion of St. Alban and his companions, who at that time shed
          their blood for our Lord.</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc27" class="pginternal">Chap. VIII. How, when
          the persecution ceased, the Church in Britain enjoyed peace till
          the time of the Arian heresy.</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc29" class="pginternal">Chap. IX. How during
          the reign of Gratian, Maximus, being created Emperor in Britain,
          returned into Gaul with a mighty army.</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc31" class="pginternal">Chap. X. How, in the
          reign of Arcadius, Pelagius, a Briton, insolently impugned the
          Grace of God.</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc33" class="pginternal">Chap. XI. How during
          the reign of Honorius, Gratian and Constantine were created tyrants
          in Britain; and soon after the former was slain in Britain, and the
          latter in Gaul.</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc35" class="pginternal">Chap. XII. How the
          Britons, being ravaged by the Scots and Picts, sought succour from
          the Romans, who coming a second time, built a wall across the
          island; but when this was broken down at once by the aforesaid
          enemies, they were reduced to greater distress than
          before.</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc37" class="pginternal">Chap. XIII. How in
          the reign of Theodosius the younger, in whose time Palladius was
          sent to the Scots that believed in Christ, the Britons begging
          assistance of Ætius, the consul, could not obtain it. [446
          <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc39" class="pginternal">Chap. XIV. How the
          Britons, compelled by the great famine, drove the barbarians out of
          their territories; and soon after there ensued, along with
          abundance of corn, decay of morals, pestilence, and the downfall of
          the nation.</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc41" class="pginternal">Chap. XV. How the
          Angles, being invited into Britain, at first drove off the enemy;
          but not long after, making a league with them, turned their weapons
          against their allies.</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc43" class="pginternal">Chap. XVI. How the
          Britons obtained their first victory over the Angles, under the
          command of Ambrosius, a Roman.</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc45" class="pginternal">Chap. XVII. How
          Germanus the Bishop, sailing into Britain with Lupus, first quelled
          the tempest of the sea, and afterwards that of the Pelagians, by
          Divine power. [429 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc47" class="pginternal">Chap. XVIII. How the
          some holy man gave sight to the blind daughter of a tribune, and
          then coming to St. Alban, there received of his relics, and left
          other relics of the blessed Apostles and other martyrs. [429
          <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc49" class="pginternal">Chap. XIX. How the
          same holy man, being detained there by sickness, by his prayers
          quenched a fire that had broken out among the houses, and was
          himself cured of his infirmity by a vision. [429 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc51" class="pginternal">Chap. XX. How the
          same Bishops brought help from Heaven to the Britons in a battle,
          and then returned home. [430 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc53" class="pginternal">Chap. XXI. How, when
          the Pelagian heresy began to spring up afresh, Germanus, returning
          to Britain with Severus, first restored bodily strength to a lame
          youth, then spiritual health to the people of God, having condemned
          or converted the Heretics. [447 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc55" class="pginternal">Chap. XXII. How the
          Britons, being for a time at rest from foreign invasions, wore
          themselves out by civil wars, and at the same time gave themselves
          up to more heinous crimes.</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc57" class="pginternal">Chap. XXIII. How the
          holy Pope Gregory sent Augustine, with other monks, to preach to
          the English nation, and encouraged them by a letter of exhortation,
          not to desist from their labour. [596 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc59" class="pginternal">Chap. XXIV. How he
          wrote to the bishop of Arles to entertain them. [596 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc61" class="pginternal">Chap. XXV. How
          Augustine, coming into Britain, first preached in the Isle of
          Thanet to the King of Kent, and having obtained licence from him,
          went into Kent, in order to preach therein. [597 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc63" class="pginternal">Chap. XXVI. How St.
          Augustine in Kent followed the doctrine and manner of life of the
          primitive Church, and settled his episcopal see in the royal city.
          [597 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc65" class="pginternal">Chap. XXVII. How St.
          Augustine, being made a bishop, sent to acquaint Pope Gregory with
          what had been done in Britain, and asked and received replies, of
          which he stood in need. [597-601 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc67" class="pginternal">Chap. XXVIII. How
          Pope Gregory wrote to the bishop of Arles to help Augustine in the
          work of God. [601 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc69" class="pginternal">Chap. XXIX. How the
          same Pope sent to Augustine the Pall and a letter, along with
          several ministers of the Word. [601 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc71" class="pginternal">Chap. XXX. A copy of
          the letter which Pope Gregory sent to the Abbot Mellitus, then
          going into Britain. [601 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc73" class="pginternal">Chap. XXXI. How Pope
          Gregory, by letter, exhorted Augustine not to glory in his
          miracles. [601 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc75" class="pginternal">Chap. XXXII. How Pope
          Gregory sent letters and gifts to King Ethelbert. [601 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc77" class="pginternal">Chap. XXXIII. How
          Augustine repaired the church of our Saviour, and built the
          monastery of the blessed Peter the Apostle; and concerning Peter
          the first abbot of the same.</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc79" class="pginternal">Chap. XXXIV. How
          Ethelfrid, king of the Northumbrians, having vanquished the nations
          of the Scots, expelled them from the territories of the English.
          [603 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li><a href="#toc81" class="pginternal">Book II</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc83" class="pginternal">Chap. I. Of the death
          of the blessed Pope Gregory. [604 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc85" class="pginternal">Chap. II. How
          Augustine admonished the bishops of the Britons on behalf of
          Catholic peace, and to that end wrought a heavenly miracle in their
          presence; and of the vengeance that pursued them for their
          contempt. [<span style="font-style: italic">Circ.</span> 603
          <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc87" class="pginternal">Chap. III. How St.
          Augustine made Mellitus and Justus bishops; and of his death. [604
          <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc89" class="pginternal">Chap. IV. How
          Laurentius and his bishops admonished the Scots to observe the
          unity of the Holy Church, particularly in keeping of Easter; and
          how Mellitus went to Rome.</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc91" class="pginternal">Chap. V. How, after
          the death of the kings Ethelbert and Sabert, their successors
          restored idolatry; for which reason, both Mellitus and Justus
          departed out of Britain. [616 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc93" class="pginternal">Chap. VI. How
          Laurentius, being reproved by the Apostle Peter, converted King
          Eadbald to Christ; and how the king soon recalled Mellitus and
          Justus to preach the Word. [617-618 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc95" class="pginternal">Chap. VII. How Bishop
          Mellitus by prayer quenched a fire in his city. [619 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc97" class="pginternal">Chap. VIII. How Pope
          Boniface sent the Pall and a letter to Justus, successor to
          Mellitus. [624 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc99" class="pginternal">Chap. IX. Of the
          reign of King Edwin, and how Paulinus, coming to preach the Gospel,
          first converted his daughter and others to the mysteries of the
          faith of Christ. [625-626 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc101" class="pginternal">Chap. X. How Pope
          Boniface, by letter, exhorted the same king to embrace the faith.
          [<span style="font-style: italic">Circ.</span> 625 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc103" class="pginternal">Chap. XI. How Pope
          Boniface advised the king's consort to use her best endeavours for
          his salvation. [<span style="font-style: italic">Circ.</span> 625
          <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc105" class="pginternal">Chap. XII. How Edwin
          was persuaded to believe by a vision which he had once seen when he
          was in exile. [<span style="font-style: italic">Circ.</span> 616
          <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc107" class="pginternal">Chap. XIII. Of the
          Council he held with his chief men concerning their reception of
          the faith of Christ, and how the high priest profaned his own
          altars. [627 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc109" class="pginternal">Chap. XIV. How King
          Edwin and his nation became Christians; and where Paulinus baptized
          them. [627 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc111" class="pginternal">Chap. XV. How the
          province of the East Angles received the faith of Christ. [627-628
          <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc113" class="pginternal">Chap. XVI. How
          Paulinus preached in the province of Lindsey; and of the character
          of the reign of Edwin. [<span style="font-style: italic">Circ.</span> 628 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc115" class="pginternal">Chap. XVII. How
          Edwin received letters of exhortation from Pope Honorius, who also
          sent the pall to Paulinus. [634 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc117" class="pginternal">Chap. XVIII. How
          Honorius, who succeeded Justus in the bishopric of Canterbury,
          received the pall and letters from Pope Honorius. [634 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc119" class="pginternal">Chap. XIX. How the
          aforesaid Honorius first, and afterwards John, wrote letters to the
          nation of the Scots, concerning the observance of Easter, and the
          Pelagian heresy. [640 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc121" class="pginternal">Chap. XX. How Edwin
          being slain, Paulinus returned into Kent, and had the bishopric of
          Rochester conferred upon him. [633 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li><a href="#toc123" class="pginternal">Book III</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc125" class="pginternal">Chap. I. How King
          Edwin's next successors lost both the faith of their nation and the
          kingdom; but the most Christian King Oswald retrieved both. [633
          <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc127" class="pginternal">Chap. II. How, among
          innumerable other miracles of healing wrought by the wood of the
          cross, which King Oswald, being ready to engage against the
          barbarians, erected, a certain man had his injured arm healed. [634
          <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc129" class="pginternal">Chap. III. How the
          same king Oswald, asking a bishop of the Scottish nation, had Aidan
          sent him, and granted him an episcopal see in the Isle of
          Lindisfarne. [635 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc131" class="pginternal">Chap. IV. When the
          nation of the Picts received the faith of Christ. [565 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc133" class="pginternal">Chap. V. Of the life
          of Bishop Aidan. [635 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc135" class="pginternal">Chap. VI. Of King
          Oswald's wonderful piety and religion. [635-642 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc137" class="pginternal">Chap. VII. How the
          West Saxons received the Word of God by the preaching of Birinus;
          and of his successors, Agilbert and Leutherius. [635-670
          <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc139" class="pginternal">Chap. VIII. How
          Earconbert, King of Kent, ordered the idols to be destroyed; and of
          his daughter Earcongota, and his kinswoman Ethelberg, virgins
          consecrated to God. [640 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc141" class="pginternal">Chap. IX. How
          miracles of healing have been frequently wrought in the place where
          King Oswald was killed; and how, first, a traveller's horse was
          restored and afterwards a young girl cured of the palsy. [642
          <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc143" class="pginternal">Chap. X. How the
          dust of that place prevailed against fire. [After 642 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc145" class="pginternal">Chap. XI. How a
          light from Heaven stood all night over his relics, and how those
          possessed with devils were healed by them. [679-697 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc147" class="pginternal">Chap. XII. How a
          little boy was cured of a fever at his tomb.</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc149" class="pginternal">Chap. XIII. How a
          certain person in Ireland was restored, when at the point of death,
          by his relics.</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc151" class="pginternal">Chap. XIV. How on
          the death of Paulinus, Ithamar was made bishop of Rochester in his
          stead; and of the wonderful humility of King Oswin, who was cruelly
          slain by Oswy. [644-651 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc153" class="pginternal">Chap. XV. How Bishop
          Aidan foretold to certain seamen that a storm would arise, and gave
          them some holy oil to calm it. [Between 642 and 645 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc155" class="pginternal">Chap. XVI. How the
          same Aidan, by his prayers, saved the royal city when it was fired
          by the enemy [Before 651 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc157" class="pginternal">Chap. XVII. How a
          prop of the church on which Bishop Aidan was leaning when he died,
          could not be consumed when the rest of the Church was on fire; and
          concerning his inward life. [651 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc159" class="pginternal">Chap. XVIII. Of the
          life and death of the religious King Sigbert. [<span style="font-style: italic">Circ.</span> 631 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc161" class="pginternal">Chap. XIX. How Fursa
          built a monastery among the East Angles, and of his visions and
          sanctity, to which, his flesh remaining uncorrupted after death
          bore testimony. [<span style="font-style: italic">Circ.</span> 633
          <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc163" class="pginternal">Chap. XX. How, when
          Honorius died, Deusdedit became Archbishop of Canterbury; and of
          those who were at that time bishops of the East Angles, and of the
          church of Rochester. [653 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc165" class="pginternal">Chap. XXI. How the
          province of the Midland Angles became Christian under King Peada.
          [653 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc167" class="pginternal">Chap. XXII. How
          under King Sigbert, through the preaching of Cedd, the East Saxons
          again received the faith, which they had before cast off. [653
          <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc169" class="pginternal">Chap. XXIII. How
          Bishop Cedd, having a place for building a monastery given him by
          King Ethelwald, consecrated it to the Lord with prayer and fasting;
          and concerning his death. [659-664 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc171" class="pginternal">Chap. XXIV. How when
          King Penda was slain, the province of the Mercians received the
          faith of Christ, and Oswy gave possessions and territories to God,
          for building monasteries, as a thank offering for the victory
          obtained. [655 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc173" class="pginternal">Chap. XXV. How the
          question arose about the due time of keeping Easter, with those
          that came out of Scotland. [664 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc175" class="pginternal">Chap. XXVI. How
          Colman, being worsted, returned home; and Tuda succeeded him in the
          bishopric; and of the state of the church under those teachers.
          [664 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc177" class="pginternal">Chap. XXVII. How
          Egbert, a holy man of the English nation, led a monastic life in
          Ireland. [664 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc179" class="pginternal">Chap. XXVIII. How,
          when Tuda was dead, Wilfrid was ordained, in Gaul, and Ceadda,
          among the West Saxons, to be bishops for the province of the
          Northumbrians. [664 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc181" class="pginternal">Chap. XXIX. How the
          priest Wighard was sent from Britain to Rome, to be ordained
          archbishop; of his death there, and of the letters of the Apostolic
          Pope giving an account thereof. [667 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc183" class="pginternal">Chap. XXX. How the
          East Saxons, during a pestilence, returned to idolatry, but were
          soon brought back from their error by the zeal of Bishop Jaruman.
          [665 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li><a href="#toc185" class="pginternal">Book IV</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc187" class="pginternal">Chap. I. How when
          Deusdedit died, Wighard was sent to Rome to receive the episcopate;
          but he dying there, Theodore was ordained archbishop, and sent into
          Britain with the Abbot Hadrian. [664-669 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc189" class="pginternal">Chap. II. How
          Theodore visited all places; how the Churches of the English began
          to be instructed in the study of Holy Scripture, and in the
          Catholic truth; and how Putta was made bishop of the Church of
          Rochester in the room of Damianus. [669 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc191" class="pginternal">Chap. III. How the
          above-mentioned Ceadda was made Bishop of the province of Mercians.
          Of his life, death, and burial. [669 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc193" class="pginternal">Chap. IV. How Bishop
          Colman, having left Britain, built two monasteries in the country
          of the Scots; the one for the Scots, the other for the English whom
          he had taken along with him. [667 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc195" class="pginternal">Chap. V. Of the
          death of the kings Oswy and Egbert, and of the synod held at the
          place Herutford, in which Archbishop Theodore presided. [670-673
          <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc197" class="pginternal">Chap. VI. How
          Wynfrid being deposed, Sexwulf received his bishopric, and
          Earconwald was made bishop of the East Saxons. [675 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc199" class="pginternal">Chap. VII. How it
          was indicated by a light from heaven where the bodies of the nuns
          should be buried in the monastery of Berecingum. [675 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>?]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc201" class="pginternal">Chap. VIII. How a
          little boy, dying in the same monastery, called upon a virgin that
          was to follow him; and how another nun, at the point of leaving her
          body, saw some small part of the future glory. [675 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>?]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc203" class="pginternal">Chap. IX. Of the
          signs which were shown from Heaven when the mother of that
          community departed this life. [675 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>?]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc205" class="pginternal">Chap. X. How a blind
          woman, praying in the burial-place of that monastery, was restored
          to her sight. [675 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>?]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc207" class="pginternal">Chap. XI. How Sebbi,
          king of the same province, ended his life in a monastery. [694
          <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc209" class="pginternal">Chap. XII. How
          Haedde succeeded Leutherius in the bishopric of the West Saxons;
          how Cuichelm succeeded Putta in the bishopric of the church of
          Rochester, and was himself succeeded by Gebmund; and who were then
          bishops of the Northumbrians. [673-681 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc211" class="pginternal">Chap. XIII. How
          Bishop Wilfrid converted the province of the South Saxons to
          Christ. [681 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc213" class="pginternal">Chap. XIV. How a
          pestilence ceased through the intercession of King Oswald. [681-686
          <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc215" class="pginternal">Chap. XV. How King
          Caedwalla, king of the Gewissae, having slain Ethelwalch, wasted
          that Province with cruel slaughter and devastation. [685
          <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc217" class="pginternal">Chap. XVI. How the
          Isle of Wight received Christian inhabitants, and two royal youths
          of that island were killed immediately after Baptism. [686
          <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc219" class="pginternal">Chap. XVII. Of the
          Synod held in the plain of Haethfelth, Archbishop Theodore being
          president. [680 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc221" class="pginternal">Chap. XVIII. Of
          John, the precentor of the Apostolic see, who came into Britain to
          teach. [680 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc223" class="pginternal">Chap. XIX. How Queen
          Ethelthryth always preserved her virginity, and her body suffered
          no corruption in the grave. [660-696 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc225" class="pginternal">Chap. XX. A Hymn
          concerning her.</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc227" class="pginternal">Chap. XXI. How
          Bishop Theodore made peace between the kings Egfrid and Ethelred.
          [679 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc229" class="pginternal">Chap. XXII. How a
          certain captive's chains fell off when Masses were sung for him.
          [679 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc231" class="pginternal">Chap. XXIII. Of the
          life and death of the Abbess Hilda. [614-680 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc233" class="pginternal">Chap. XXIV. That
          there was in her monastery a brother, on whom the gift of song was
          bestowed by Heaven. [680 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc235" class="pginternal">Chap. XXV. Of the
          vision that appeared to a certain man of God before the monastery
          of the city Coludi was burned down.</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc237" class="pginternal">Chap. XXVI. Of the
          death of the Kings Egfrid and Hlothere. [684-685 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc239" class="pginternal">Chap. XXVII. How
          Cuthbert, a man of God, was made bishop; and how he lived and
          taught whilst still in the monastic life. [685 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc241" class="pginternal">Chap. XXVIII. How
          the same St. Cuthbert, living the life of an Anchorite, by his
          prayers obtained a spring in a dry soil, and had a crop from seed
          sown by the labour of his hands out of season. [676 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc243" class="pginternal">Chap. XXIX. How this
          bishop foretold that his own death was at hand to the anchorite
          Herebert. [687 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc245" class="pginternal">Chap. XXX. How his
          body was found altogether uncorrupted after it had been buried
          eleven years; and how his successor in the bishopric departed this
          world not long after. [698 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc247" class="pginternal">Chap. XXXI. Of one
          that was cured of a palsy at his tomb.</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc249" class="pginternal">Chap. XXXII. Of one
          who was lately cured of a disease in his eye at the relics of St.
          Cuthbert.</a></li>
<li><a href="#toc251" class="pginternal">Book V</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc253" class="pginternal">Chap. I. How
          Ethelwald, successor to Cuthbert, leading a hermit's life, calmed a
          tempest by his prayers when the brethren were in danger at sea.
          [687-699 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc255" class="pginternal">Chap. II. How Bishop
          John cured a dumb man by his blessing. [687 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc257" class="pginternal">Chap. III. How he
          healed a sick maiden by his prayers. [705 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc259" class="pginternal">Chap. IV. How he
          healed a thegn's wife that was sick, with holy water.</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc261" class="pginternal">Chap. V. How he
          likewise recalled by his prayers a thegn's servant from
          death.</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc263" class="pginternal">Chap. VI. How, both
          by his prayers and blessing, he recalled from death one of his
          clerks, who had bruised himself by a fall.</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc265" class="pginternal">Chap. VII. How
          Caedwalla, king of the West Saxons, went to Rome to be baptized;
          and his successor Ini, also devoutly journeyed to the same
          threshold of the holy Apostles. [688 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc267" class="pginternal">Chap. VIII. How,
          when Archbishop Theodore died, Bertwald succeeded him as
          archbishop, and, among many others whom he ordained, he made the
          learned Tobias bishop of the church of Rochester. [690 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc269" class="pginternal">Chap. IX. How the
          holy man, Egbert, would have gone into Germany to preach, but could
          not; and how Wictbert went, but because he availed nothing,
          returned into Ireland, whence he came. [Circ. 688 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc271" class="pginternal">Chap. X. How
          Wilbrord, preaching in Frisland, converted many to Christ; and how
          his two companions, the Hewalds, suffered martyrdom. [690
          <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc273" class="pginternal">Chap. XI. How the
          venerable Suidbert in Britain, and Wilbrord at Rome, were ordained
          bishops for Frisland. [692 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc275" class="pginternal">Chap. XII. How one
          in the province of the Northumbrians, rose from the dead, and
          related many things which he had seen, some to be greatly dreaded
          and some to be desired. [Circ. 696 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc277" class="pginternal">Chap. XIII. How
          another contrarywise before his death saw a book containing his
          sins, which was shown him by devils. [704-709 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc279" class="pginternal">Chap. XIV. How
          another in like manner, being at the point of death, saw the place
          of punishment appointed for him in Hell.</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc281" class="pginternal">Chap. XV. How divers
          churches of the Scots, at the instance of Adamnan, adopted the
          Catholic Easter; and how the same wrote a book about the holy
          places. [703 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc283" class="pginternal">Chap. XVI. The
          account given in the aforesaid book of the place of our Lord's
          Nativity, Passion, and Resurrection.</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc285" class="pginternal">Chap. XVII. What he
          likewise wrote of the place of our Lord's Ascension, and the tombs
          of the patriarchs.</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc287" class="pginternal">Chap. XVIII. How the
          South Saxons received Eadbert and Eolla, and the West Saxons,
          Daniel and Aldhelm, for their bishops; and of the writings of the
          same Aldhelm. [705 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc289" class="pginternal">Chap. XIX. How
          Coinred, king of the Mercians, and Offa, king of the East Saxons,
          ended their days at Rome, in the monastic habit; and of the life
          and death of Bishop Wilfrid. [709 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc291" class="pginternal">Chap. XX. How
          Albinus succeeded to the godly Abbot Hadrian, and Acca to Bishop
          Wilfrid. [709 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc293" class="pginternal">Chap. XXI. How the
          Abbot Ceolfrid sent master-builders to the King of the Picts to
          build a church, and with them an epistle concerning the Catholic
          Easter and the Tonsure. [710 <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc295" class="pginternal">Chap. XXII. How the
          monks of Hii, and the monasteries subject to them, began to
          celebrate the canonical Easter at the preaching of Egbert. [716
          <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc297" class="pginternal">Chap. XXIII. Of the
          present state of the English nation, or of all Britain. [725-731
          <span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span>]</a></li>
<li style="margin-left: 2em"><a href="#toc299" class="pginternal">Chap. XXIV.
          Chronological recapitulation of the whole work: also concerning the
          author himself.</a></li>
<li><a href="#toc301" class="pginternal">Continuation</a></li>
<li><a href="#toc303" class="pginternal">Index</a></li>
<li><a href="#toc305" class="pginternal">Footnotes</a></li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-body" style="margin-bottom: 6.00em; margin-top: 6.00em">
<span class="tei tei-pb" id="pagev">[pg v]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pgv"/>
<hr class="page"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 5.00em; margin-top: 5.00em">
<a id="toc1"/> <a id="pdf2"/>
<h1 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 3.46em; margin-top: 3.46em">
<span style="font-size: 173%">Editor's Preface</span></h1>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The English
        version of the <span class="tei tei-q">“Ecclesiastical
        History”</span> in the following pages is a revision of the
        translation of Dr. Giles, which is itself a revision of the earlier
        rendering of Stevens. In the present edition very considerable
        alterations have been made, but the work of Dr. Giles remains the
        basis of the translation. The Latin text used throughout is Mr.
        Plummer's. Since the edition of Dr. Giles appeared in 1842, so much
        fresh work on the subject has been done, and recent research has
        brought so many new facts to light, that it has been found necessary
        to rewrite the notes almost entirely, and to add a new introduction.
        After the appearance of Mr. Plummer's edition of the Historical Works
        of Bede, it might seem superfluous, for the present at least, to
        write any notes at all on the <span class="tei tei-q">“Ecclesiastical
        History.”</span> The present volume, however, is intended to fulfil a
        different and much humbler function. There has been no attempt at any
        original work, and no new theories are advanced. The object of the
        book is merely to present in a short and convenient form the
        substance of the views held by trustworthy authorities, and it is
        hoped that it may be found useful by those students who have either
        no time or no inclination to deal with more important works.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Among the books of
        which most use has been made, are Mr. Plummer's edition of the
        <span class="tei tei-q">“Ecclesiastical History,”</span> <span class="tei tei-pb" id="pagevi">[pg vi]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pgvi"/> Messrs. Mayor and Lumby's edition of
        Books III and IV, Dr. Bright's <span class="tei tei-q">“Early English
        Church History,”</span> and Dr. Hunt's <span class="tei tei-q">“History of the English Church from its foundation to the
        Norman Conquest.”</span> Many of the articles in the <span class="tei tei-q">“Dictionary of Christian Biography”</span> and the
        <span class="tei tei-q">“Dictionary of Christian Antiquities,”</span>
        Dr. Mason's <span class="tei tei-q">“Mission of St.
        Augustine,”</span> Dr. Rhŷs's <span class="tei tei-q">“Celtic
        Britain,”</span> and a number of other books, mentioned in the notes,
        have been consulted.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">For help received
        in different ways I wish to express my gratitude to various
        correspondents and friends. I am particularly indebted to Mr. Edward
        Bell, who has kindly revised my proofs and made many valuable
        suggestions. For information on certain points I have to thank the
        Rev. Charles Plummer, Fellow of Corpus Christi College, Oxford,
        Professor Lindsay of St. Andrews University, Miss Wordsworth,
        Principal, and Miss Lodge, Vice-Principal of Lady Margaret Hall,
        Oxford; and in a very special sense I wish to acknowledge my
        obligations to Miss Paterson, Assistant Librarian at the University
        Library, St. Andrews, whose unfailing kindness in verifying
        references, and supplying me with books, has greatly lightened my
        labours.</p>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="pagexix">[pg xix]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pgxix"/>
<hr class="page"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 5.00em; margin-top: 5.00em">
<a id="toc3"/> <a id="pdf4"/>
<h1 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 3.46em; margin-top: 3.46em">
<span style="font-size: 173%">Introduction</span></h1>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">There are, it has
        been estimated, in England and on the Continent, in all about 140
        manuscripts of the <span class="tei tei-q">“Ecclesiastical
        History.”</span> Of these, four date from the eighth century: the
        Moore MS. (Cambridge), so called, because, after being sold by
        auction in the reign of William III, it came into the possession of
        Bishop Moore, who bequeathed it to the University of Cambridge;
        Cotton, Tiberius A, xiv; Cotton, Tiberius C, ii; and the Namur MS. A
        detailed account of these, as well as of a great number of other
        manuscripts, will be found in Mr. Plummer's Introduction to his
        edition of Bede's Historical Works. He has been the first to collate
        the four oldest MSS., besides examining numerous others and collating
        them in certain passages. He has pointed out that two of the MSS.
        dating from the eighth century (the century in which Bede died), the
        Moore MS. and Cotton, Tiberius A, xiv, point to a common original
        which cannot be far removed from Bede's autograph. We are thus
        brought very near to our author, and may have more than in most cases
        the assurance that we have before us what he actually meant to
        say.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The earliest
        editions were printed on the Continent; the <span class="tei tei-q">“editio princeps”</span> is believed to date from 1475. A
        number of editions followed in the sixteenth and seventeenth
        centuries; the first in England was published by Abraham Whelock at
        Cambridge in 1643-4. Smith's <span class="tei tei-pb" id="pagexx">[pg
        xx]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pgxx"/>
        edition in 1722 marked a new era in the history of the book. It was
        the first critical edition, the text being based on the Moore MS.
        collated with three others, of which two were eighth century MSS.;
        and succeeding editors, Stevenson (1841), Giles (1842), Hussey
        (1846), the editor in the <span class="tei tei-q">“Monumenta
        Historica Britannica”</span> (1848), Moberly (1869), Holder (1882),
        base their work mainly on Smith's. Mr. Mayor and Mr. Lumby together
        edited Books III and IV with excellent notes in 1878. Their text
        <span class="tei tei-q">“reproduces exactly the Moore MS.”</span>
        which they collated with some other Cambridge MSS. (cf. Mayor and
        Lumby, Excursus II). In 1896 the Rev. C. Plummer published his
        edition of Bede's Historical Works, the first critical edition since
        Smith's, and <span class="tei tei-q">“the very first which exhibits
        in an <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="la"><span style="font-style: italic">apparatus
        criticus</span></span> the various readings of the MSS. on which the
        text is based.”</span> For the student of Bede this admirable book is
        of the highest value, and the labours of all succeeding editors are
        made comparatively light. Besides the most minute and accurate work
        on the text, it contains a copious and interesting commentary and the
        fullest references to the various sources upon which the editor has
        drawn.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The first
        translation of the <span class="tei tei-q">“Ecclesiastical
        History”</span> is the Anglo-Saxon version, executed either by Alfred
        himself or under his immediate supervision. Of this version Dr.
        Hodgkin says: <span class="tei tei-q">“As this book had become a kind
        of classic among churchmen, Alfred allowed himself here less liberty
        than in some of his other translations. Some letters, epitaphs, and
        similar documents are omitted, and there is an almost complete
        erasure of the chapters relating to the wearisome Paschal
        controversy. In other respects the king's translation seems to be a
        fairly accurate reproduction of the original work.”</span> Mr.
        Plummer, however, finds it <span class="tei tei-q">“very rarely
        available for the settlement of minute differences of
        reading.”</span></p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="pagexxi">[pg
        xxi]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pgxxi"/>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The first modern
        English translation is Thomas Stapleton's (1565), published at
        Antwerp. It is a controversial work, intended to point out to Queen
        Elizabeth <span class="tei tei-q">“in how many and weighty pointes
        the pretended refourmers of the Church ... have departed from the
        patern of that sounde and Catholike faith planted first among
        Englishmen by holy S. Augustin, our Apostle, and his vertuous
        company, described truly and sincerely by Venerable Bede, so called
        in all Christendom for his passing vertues and rare lerning, the
        Author of this History.”</span> To save Elizabeth's time <span class="tei tei-q">“in espying out the particulars,”</span> the translator
        has <span class="tei tei-q">“gathered out of the whole History a
        number of diversities between the pretended religion of Protestants
        and the primitive faith of the english Church.”</span> If charm and
        appropriateness of style were the only qualities to be aimed at in a
        translation, we might well content ourselves with this rendering,
        which fills with despair the translator of to-day, debarred by his
        date from writing Elizabethan English.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The work was again
        translated by John Stevens (1723), and a third time (with some
        omissions) by W. Hurst in 1814. In 1840 Dr. Giles published a new
        edition of Stevens's translation with certain alterations; and a
        second edition of the same volume was published in 1842, and
        incorporated in the collected works of Bede, edited by Dr. Giles. In
        1870 a literal translation by the Rev. L. Gidley was published. The
        present volume is a revision of the translation of Dr. Giles.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">A brief analysis
        of the work may be of some use to the student in keeping distinct the
        different threads of the narrative, as owing to the variety of
        subjects introduced, and the want of strict chronological order, it
        is difficult to grasp the sequence of events as a coherent whole.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The sources from
        which Bede draws his material are <span class="tei tei-pb" id="pagexxii">[pg xxii]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pgxxii"/> briefly indicated in the dedication to King
        Ceolwulf which forms the Preface, and in it he acknowledges his
        obligations to the friends and correspondents who have helped and
        encouraged him. For the greater part of Book I (cc. 1-22), which
        forms the introduction to his real subject, he depends on earlier
        authors. Here he does not specify his sources, but indicates them
        generally as <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="la"><span style="font-style: italic">priorum scripta</span></span>.
        These authors are mainly Pliny, Solinus, Orosius, Eutropius, and the
        British historian Gildas. In the story of Germanus and Lupus he
        follows closely the Life of Germanus by Constantius of Lyons. Prosper
        of Aquitaine also supplies him with some materials. When he comes to
        his main subject, the History of the English Church, he appears to
        rely but little upon books. Only a very few are referred to here and
        there, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">e.g.</span></span>, The Life of St. Fursa, The
        Life of St. Ethelburg, Adamnan's work on the Holy Places, and the
        Anonymous Life of St. Cuthbert. That some form of annalistic records
        existed before his time, and that these were consulted by him, we may
        infer from some of his chronological references (cf. iii, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_I">1</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_IX">9</a>). Local information
        with regard to provinces other than Northumbria he obtains from his
        correspondents in various parts of England, and these are expressly
        mentioned in the Preface.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">For the history of
        the Roman mission and of Kent generally, as well as some particulars
        with regard to the conversion of other provinces, his chief source is
        the Church of Canterbury, which apparently possessed, besides oral
        tradition, written documents relating to the first beginnings of the
        Church. Moreover, Nothelm, who was the bearer of much important
        material, had been to Rome and had permission to search the papal
        archives. But it is in dealing with the history of Northumbria, as is
        natural, that Bede's information is most varied and copious. Much of
        it is apparently obtained directly from <span class="tei tei-pb" id="pagexxiii">[pg xxiii]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pgxxiii"/> eye-witnesses of the events, much would
        doubtless be preserved in the records of the Church of Lindisfarne,
        to which he had access, perhaps also in his own monastery. We know
        that the monasteries kept calendars in which the death-days of saints
        and others were entered, and other records of similar nature (cf.
        <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XIV">iv, 14</a>), and that
        these were used as materials for history.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Passing to the
        history itself, we may trace a division of subjects or periods
        roughly analogous to the division into books. Book I contains the
        long introduction, the sending of the Roman mission, and the
        foundation of the Church; Books II and III, the period of missionary
        activity and the establishment of Christianity throughout the land.
        Book IV may be said to describe the period of organization. In Book V
        the English Church itself becomes a missionary centre, planting the
        faith in Germany, and drawing the Celtic Churches into conformity
        with Rome.</p>
<div class="tei tei-tb">
<hr style="width: 50%"/>
</div>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">Book
        I.</span></span>—In Book I, cc. 1-22, Bede sketches the early history
        of Britain, describing the country and giving some account of the
        various races by whom it was inhabited. The story of the Roman
        occupation is narrated at some length, the invasions of the Picts and
        Scots and consequent miseries of the Britons, their appeals for help
        to the Romans, the final departure of their protectors, and the
        coming of the Saxons are described. We have some shadowy outlines of
        British Church History in the legendary account of the conversion of
        King Lucius, in the story of St. Alban, affording evidence of a great
        persecution of Christians during the Roman occupation, in the
        allusions to the Arian and Pelagian heresies, and in the mission of
        Germanus and Lupus. A brief allusion to the mission of Palladius is
        all that we hear of the Irish Church at this period.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">These chapters are
        introductory to the main subject, the History of the English Church,
        which begins in <span class="tei tei-pb" id="pagexxiv">[pg
        xxiv]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pgxxiv"/>
        Chapter 23 with the mission of St. Augustine in 597 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span> The reception of the
        Christian faith in the kingdom of Kent and the foundation of a
        national Church occupy the remaining chapters of the book. Various
        letters of Pope Gregory relating to the mission and his answers to
        the questions of Augustine are given at length; and the Book
        concludes with a piece of Northumbrian history, Ethelfrid's conquests
        of the Britons and the defeat of Aedan, king of the Dalriadic Scots,
        at Degsastan in 603 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">Book
        II.</span></span>—Book II opens with a biographical sketch of Gregory
        the Great, the founder of the Mission. This is followed by an account
        of Augustine's negotiations with the leaders of the British Church
        with regard to the Paschal question and some other matters, his
        failure to win them over (a failure apparently largely due to his own
        want of tact in dealing with the susceptible Celtic temperament), his
        alleged prophecy of disaster and its fulfilment some time after at
        the battle of Chester. Then we have the consecration of Mellitus to
        London, as Bishop of the East Saxons, and Justus to Rochester (604
        <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>); the evangelization of
        the East Saxons by Mellitus; the death of Augustine and succession of
        Laurentius as Archbishop (no date is given; it may have been in 605);
        fresh attempts at union with the Celtic Churches, in which again we
        can perceive a failure of courtesy on the one side met by an
        obstinate pride on the other. The death of Ethelbert in Kent (616
        <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>) and that of Sabert in
        Essex, soon after, lead to a pagan reaction in both provinces;
        Mellitus and Justus take refuge on the Continent; Laurentius,
        intending to follow them, is stopped by a vision which leads to the
        conversion of King Eadbald and the recovery of Kent for Christianity.
        Essex, however, continues to be pagan. On the death of Laurentius
        (619 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>), Mellitus succeeds to
        Canterbury and is himself succeeded by Justus (in 624). In Chapter 9
        we enter upon a new development of the highest importance in the work
        of the mission. The marriage of Edwin, king of Northumbria, and the
        Kentish princess, Ethelberg, brings about the conversion of
        Northumbria <span class="tei tei-pb" id="pagexxv">[pg
        xxv]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pgxxv"/>
        through the preaching of Paulinus. The story is told in detail.
        Letters from Pope Boniface to Edwin and his consort are quoted at
        length, Edwin's early history with its bearing on the great crisis of
        his life is related; finally we have the decisive debate in the
        Witenagemot at Goodmanham and the baptism of the king at Easter, 627
        <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span> Through the influence
        of Edwin on Earpwald, king of East Anglia, that province is next
        converted, but on the death of Earpwald the people lapse into
        paganism for three years, till Christianity is finally established by
        the labours of Bishop Felix, under the enlightened King Sigbert, who
        had himself been drawn to the faith in Gaul.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Meanwhile, peace
        and prosperity reign in Northumbria, and Paulinus extends his
        preaching to Lindsey. He re-receives the pall from Pope Honorius, in
        accordance with the original intention of Gregory that the Bishop of
        York should rank as a metropolitan. At Canterbury, Justus is
        succeeded by Archbishop Honorius. Parenthetically we have extracts
        from letters, probably of the year 640 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>, addressed by the Roman
        see to the Irish clergy on the Paschal question and the Pelagian
        heresy.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In Chapter 20 we
        have a dramatic climax to the book in the overthrow and death of
        Edwin at the battle of Hatfield in 633 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>; the devastation of
        Northumbria by the British king, Caedwalla, and Penda of Mercia; and
        the flight of Paulinus, taking with him Ethelberg and Eanfled to
        Kent, where he ends his life in charge of the Church of Rochester.
        His work in Northumbria seems for the time, at least, wholly
        overthrown. Only James the Deacon remains heroically at his post to
        keep alive the smouldering embers of the faith.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">Book
        III.</span></span>—Book III opens with the story of the apostasy of
        the Northumbrian kings and the miseries of the <span class="tei tei-q">“Hateful Year,”</span> terminated by the victory of
        Oswald at Heavenfield in 634 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span> Christianity is brought
        again to Northumbria (635 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>) by the Celtic Mission,
        sent from Iona at the request of Oswald, who nobly co-operates with
        Aidan in the work of evangelization. Aidan fixes his see at
        Lindisfarne. The mention of Iona leads to a short account of the
        mission of St. Columba to the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="pagexxvi">[pg xxvi]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pgxxvi"/> Northern Picts in 565 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>, and incidentally of
        St. Ninian's mission to the Southern Picts <span class="tei tei-q">“long before”</span>; the grant of Iona to St. Columba,
        and its constitution, the character of its monks and their error with
        regard to Easter. The characters of Aidan and Oswald are described;
        and the union of Deira and Bernicia under Oswald is briefly
        mentioned.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In Chapter 7 we
        pass to a fresh missionary enterprise. Birinus, sent to Britain by
        Pope Honorius, converts the West Saxons. Their king, Cynegils, is
        baptized, and a see is established at Dorchester, in Oxfordshire.
        Under Coinwalch, the successor of Cynegils, the province passes
        through various vicissitudes, political and ecclesiastical, and
        finally the West Saxon see is fixed at Winchester.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In Kent,
        Earconbert succeeds Eadbald in 640 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>, and takes vigorous
        measures for the suppression of idolatry. His daughter, Earcongota,
        and many other high-born English ladies enter the religious life in
        Gaul, for convents are still scarce in England.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In Chapter 9,
        reverting to the history of Northumbria, Bede tells us of the death
        of Oswald at Maserfelth in 642, and relates at length various
        miracles wrought by his relics. Oswald is succeeded by Oswy in
        Bernicia and in Deira by Oswin. The latter is treacherously murdered
        by Oswy; his character is described. The death of Aidan (in 651)
        immediately follows that of his beloved king; Aidan's miracles are
        related, and a warm tribute is paid to his character, in spite of the
        inevitable error with regard to Easter, which is severely
        condemned.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In Chapter 18,
        passing again to East Anglian history, we hear of King Sigbert's
        services to education, and of his retirement to a monastery from
        which he was forcibly drawn to fall in battle against the Mercians.
        (The chronology is here very vague.) A vision of the Irish St. Fursa,
        who founded the monastery of Cnobheresburg in East Anglia is told in
        detail. Changes in the episcopate in East Anglia and elsewhere are
        mentioned. Deusdedit succeeds Honorius as Archbishop of Canterbury in
        654.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Again, a
        Northumbrian prince gives a fresh impulse to the spread of
        Christianity. In 653 the Middle Angles <span class="tei tei-pb" id="pagexxvii">[pg xxvii]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pgxxvii"/> (who occupied a part of Mercia) are converted,
        their prince, Peada, being persuaded chiefly by his brother-in-law,
        Alchfrid, a son of Oswy. Four priests are sent to them to preach and
        baptize, Cedd, Adda, Betti, and Diuma, and Diuma becomes bishop of
        the Middle Angles and Mercians. Similarly, at this time, King Sigbert
        of Essex listens to the exhortations of his friend, King Oswy, and,
        at the preaching of Cedd, the East Saxons receive the faith a second
        time. Cedd becomes their bishop. Sigbert's tragic death is related.
        His successor, Suidhelm, receives baptism at the hands of Cedd. The
        foundation of Lastingham by Ethelwald of Deira and its consecration
        by Cedd are described. Cedd dies of the plague of 664.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Meanwhile,
        important political changes have taken place in the north: the defeat
        and death of Penda at the Winwaed in 655 are followed by Oswy's rule,
        which established Christianity in Mercia, in spite of a successful
        rebellion after three years, when the Mercians threw off the yoke of
        Northumbria and set up Penda's son, Wulfhere, as their king.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In Chapter 25 we
        come to the Synod of Whitby (664 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>),
        which settled the Easter question for the English Church. Wilfrid
        comes to the front as a champion of the Catholic rules. The opposing
        party either retire or conform. The self-denial and devotion of the
        Celtic missionaries are highly praised, and some account of the life
        led by English students in Ireland follows, with the story of the
        self-dedication of Egbert, who is destined to play a prominent part
        afterwards in the history of the Church.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The consecration
        of both Wilfrid and Ceadda (664 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>), as bishops of
        Northumbria leads to complications in the episcopate. An important
        step towards the unity of the English nation in ecclesiastical
        matters is taken when Wighard is sent to Rome by the kings Oswy and
        Egbert, acting in concert, to be consecrated as Archbishop of
        Canterbury (667 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>). Wighard dies there,
        and Pope Vitalian undertakes to find an archbishop for the English
        Church.</p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="pagexxviii">[pg
        xxviii]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pgxxviii"/>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The book ends with
        a fresh apostasy in Essex during the miseries of the great plague of
        664. Mercia, so lately itself evangelized, becomes a new missionary
        centre, King Wulfhere sending Bishop Jaruman to recall the East
        Saxons to the faith.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">Book
        IV.</span></span>—In all but one of the kingdoms of England
        Christianity is now, at least in name, established, and the Church
        settles down to the work of organization. The man for this task is
        found in Theodore of Tarsus, consecrated Archbishop of the English in
        668. He arrives at Canterbury in 669. We hear at once of the vigorous
        impulse given by him and Abbot Hadrian to the various departments of
        education there. Finding an irregularity in Ceadda's orders, he
        completes his ordination and makes him Bishop of the Mercians
        (probably in 669), with his see at Lichfield. Ceadda's death (672
        <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>), his character, and
        the miracles and visions connected with him are described.
        Parenthetically we get an account of Colman's activity in Ireland
        after his retirement, in consequence of the decision at Whitby. The
        most important political events at this time are the death of Oswy
        and succession of Egfrid in Northumbria in 670 or 671, and the death
        of Egbert and succession of Hlothere in Kent in 673.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the same year
        the Council of Hertford, the first English provincial council, is
        held, and marks the strength and independence of the Church. Theodore
        proceeds with his reforms in the episcopate. Various events of
        ecclesiastical importance follow; the East Anglian diocese is divided
        about this time, and other changes are effected.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Essex, so long
        prone to lapses into paganism, becomes at this time a centre of
        religious life under its Bishop Earconwald and its king Sebbi.
        Earconwald, whose holiness is attested by many miraculous
        circumstances, was the founder of the monasteries of Chertsey and
        Barking, the latter of which was ruled by his sister, the saintly
        Ethelburg. Various miracles are related in connection with her and
        her monastery. The king of the East Saxons, Sebbi, is a man of
        unusual piety who resigns his kingdom and receives the
        tonsure.</p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="pagexxix">[pg
        xxix]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pgxxix"/>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">After a brief
        allusion to West Saxon history, the devastation of Kent by Ethelred
        of Mercia in 676, and certain changes in the episcopate, we come to
        an important step in the organization of the Church taken by
        Theodore. In pursuance of his policy of increasing the number of
        bishops, he subdivides the great Northumbrian diocese. Wilfrid is
        expelled (678 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>). From these events we
        pass summarily to the evangelization of the South Saxons by Wilfrid,
        who extends his labours to the Isle of Wight, and thus the last of
        the English provinces is won for the faith.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the Council of
        Hatfield (680 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>) the English Church
        asserts its orthodoxy and unites with the continental Churches in
        repudiating the heresy of the Monothelites. Turning to Northumbrian
        history, we have the story of Egfrid's queen, Ethelthryth, and a hymn
        composed in her honour by Bede. The war between Mercia and
        Northumbria in 679 is ended by the mediation of Theodore, and a
        miracle in connection with the battle of the Trent is related.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The remainder of
        the book is occupied mainly with Northumbrian history, the life and
        death of Hilda, Abbess of Whitby, the story of the poet Caedmon, the
        destruction of Coldingham, prophesied by the monk Adamnan, Egfrid's
        invasion of Ireland (684 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>) and of the country of
        the Picts (685 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>), his defeat and death
        in that year, the decline of Northumbria, the flight of Bishop
        Trumwine from Abercorn, and the succession of Aldfrid to the kingdom.
        The death of Hlothere of Kent (685 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>) is followed by anarchy
        in that province, till Wictred succeeds and restores peace.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In Chapters 27-32
        we have an account of the life of St. Cuthbert and stories of the
        miracles wrought by his relics.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">Book
        V.</span></span>—Book V opens with the story of the holy Ethelwald,
        who succeeded Cuthbert as anchorite at Farne, and a miracle wrought
        through his intercession. This is followed (cc. 2-6) by an account of
        John of Beverley, Bishop of Hexham, and the miracles attributed to
        him. In Chapter 7 we have a piece of West Saxon <span class="tei tei-pb" id="pagexxx">[pg xxx]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pgxxx"/> history: Caedwalla, King of Wessex, after
        a life of war and bloodshed, goes to Rome to receive baptism there,
        and dies immediately after his admission into the Church (689
        <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>). He is succeeded by
        Ini, who in 725 likewise ended his days at Rome.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In 690 Theodore
        dies, after an episcopate of twenty-two years. Bertwald succeeds him
        at Canterbury in 693.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At this time
        Englishmen begin to extend their missionary enterprise abroad.
        Various missions are undertaken by men who have lived long in Ireland
        and caught the Celtic zeal for the work of evangelization. The story
        is told of the attempted mission of Egbert to Germany and the
        unsuccessful venture of Witbert. Wilbrord (in 690) and others plant
        the faith among the German tribes.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The vision of
        Drythelm is inserted here, probably on chronological grounds
        (<span class="tei tei-q">“his temporibus”</span>), and other visions
        of the future world follow.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Apparently about
        the same time a change is effected in the attitude of the greater
        part of the Celtic Church towards the Paschal question. The Northern
        Irish are converted to the Roman usages by Adamnan, Abbot of Iona,
        whose book on the <span class="tei tei-q">“Holy Places”</span> is
        here described (cc. 16-17).</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The death of
        Aldfrid and succession of Osred in Northumbria in 705 are the next
        events narrated.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">About this time
        the division of the West Saxon diocese is carried out, Aldhelm being
        appointed to Sherborne and Daniel to Winchester; the South Saxons
        receive a bishop of their own for the first time. In 709 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span> Coenred of Mercia and
        Offa of Essex receive the tonsure at Rome, and in the same year
        Bishop Wilfrid dies. The story of his life is told.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Not long after,
        Hadrian dies and is succeeded by Albinus as Abbot of St. Augustine's.
        Bede's friend, Acca, succeeds Wilfrid as Bishop of Hexham. His
        services to the Church are enumerated.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">An important step
        is taken at this time by the Northern Picts in the acceptance of the
        Roman rules with regard to Easter and the tonsure. The letter of
        Abbot Ceolfrid of Wearmouth and Jarrow to the Pictish king Naiton
        <span class="tei tei-pb" id="pagexxxi">[pg xxxi]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pgxxxi"/> on this subject is
        quoted at length. Soon after, Iona yields to the preaching of Egbert,
        and receives the Catholic usages. Egbert dies in 729. In Chapter 23 a
        number of events are briefly mentioned; the death of Wictred of Kent
        in 725, and the succession of his sons, the death of the learned
        Tobias, Bishop of Rochester, in 726, the appearance of two comets in
        729, followed by the devastation of Gaul by the Saracens, the death
        of the Northumbrian king Osric, and succession of Ceolwulf in 729;
        finally, the death of Archbishop Bertwald in 731 and the succession
        of Tatwine. Then follows an account of the state of the English
        episcopate in 731, the year in which Bede finished the History. The
        relations of the English with Picts, Scots, and Britons are
        described, and some allusion is made to the growth of monasticism in
        this time of external peace.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The book closes in
        Chapter 24 with a chronological summary of the whole work, an
        autobiographical sketch of the author, and a list of his works.</p>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="pagexxxiii">[pg
      xxxiii]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pgxxxiii"/>
<hr class="page"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 5.00em; margin-top: 5.00em">
<a id="toc5"/> <a id="pdf6"/>
<h1 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 3.46em; margin-top: 3.46em">
<span style="font-size: 173%">Life Of Bede</span></h1>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Few lives afford
        less material for the biographer than Bede's; few seem to possess a
        more irresistible fascination. Often as the simple story has been
        told, the desire to tell it afresh appears to be perennial. And yet
        it is perhaps as wholly devoid of incident as any life could be. The
        short autobiographical sketch at the end of the <span class="tei tei-q">“Ecclesiastical History”</span> tells us practically all:
        that he was born in the territory of the twin monastery of Wearmouth
        and Jarrow; that at the age of seven he was sent by his kinsfolk to
        be brought up, first under the Abbot Benedict, afterwards under
        Ceolfrid; that in his nineteenth year (the canonical age was
        twenty-five) he was admitted to the diaconate, and received priest's
        orders in his thirtieth year, in both instances at the hands of John,
        Bishop of Hexham, and by order of the Abbot Ceolfrid; that he spent
        his whole life in the monastery in learning, in teaching, and in
        writing, and in the observance of the monastic rule and attendance at
        the daily services of the Church. Of his family we know nothing; the
        name Beda appears to have been not uncommon. The fact that he was
        handed over by kinsmen (<span class="tei tei-q">“cura
        propinquorum”</span>) to Abbot Benedict would seem to imply that he
        was an orphan when he entered the monastery at the age of seven, but
        it was not unusual for parents to dedicate their infant children to
        the religious life, in many cases even at an earlier age than Bede's.
        We may compare the story of the little boy, Aesica, at Barking,
        related by Bede, and of Elfled, the daughter of Oswy, dedicated by
        her father before she was a year old.</p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="pagexxxiv">[pg xxxiv]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pgxxxiv"/>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The epithet
        <span class="tei tei-q">“Venerable,”</span> commonly attached to his
        name, has given rise to more than one legend. It was apparently first
        applied to him in the ninth century, and is said to have been an
        appellation of priests. The best known of these legends is Fuller's
        story of a certain <span class="tei tei-q">“dunce monk”</span> who
        set about writing Bede's epitaph, and being unable to complete the
        verse, <span class="tei tei-q">“Hic sunt in fossa Bedae ...
        ossa,”</span> went to bed with his task unfinished. Returning to it
        in the morning, he found that an angel had filled the gap with the
        word <span class="tei tei-q">“venerabilis.”</span> Another account
        tells how Bede, in his old age, when his eyes were dim, was induced
        by certain <span class="tei tei-q">“mockers”</span> to preach, under
        the mistaken belief that the people were assembled to hear him. As he
        ended his sermon with a solemn invocation of the Trinity, the angels
        (in one version it is the stones of a rocky valley) responded
        <span class="tei tei-q">“Amen, very venerable Bede.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The land on which
        Bede was born was granted by Egfrid to Benedict Biscop for the
        foundation of the monasteries a short time after the birth of Bede.
        Wearmouth was founded in 674, Jarrow in 681 or 682. Bede was among
        those members of the community who were transferred to Jarrow under
        Abbot Ceolfrid, and under his rule and that of his successor,
        Huaetbert, he passed his life. With regard to the chief dates, the
        authorities differ, Simeon of Durham and others placing his birth as
        late as 677. Bede himself tells us that he was in his fifty-ninth
        year when he wrote the short autobiography at the end of the History.
        That work was finished in 731, and there seems to be no good reason
        to suppose that the autobiographical sketch was written at a later
        time. We may infer then that he was born in 673, that he was ordained
        deacon in 691 and priest in 702. For his death, 735, the date given
        in the <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Continuation"><span class="tei tei-q">“Continuation,”</span></a> seems to be supported by the
        evidence of the letter of Cuthbert to Cuthwin (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.
        infra</span></span>). From this it appears that he died on a
        Wednesday, which nevertheless is called Ascension Day, implying,
        doubtless, that his death occurred on the eve, after the festival had
        begun, according to ecclesiastical reckoning. It is further explained
        <span class="tei tei-pb" id="pagexxxv">[pg xxxv]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pgxxxv"/> that Ascension Day
        was on the 26th of May (<span class="tei tei-q">“VII Kal.
        Junii”</span>),<a href="#note_1" id="noteref_1" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1</span></span></a> which was
        actually the case in the year 735.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Beyond the
        testimony borne to his exceptional diligence as a student in a letter
        from Alcuin to the monks of Wearmouth and Jarrow, we hear nothing of
        his childhood and early youth. One anecdote in the Anonymous History
        of the Abbots may perhaps refer to him, though no name is given. It
        tells how, when the plague of 686 devastated the monastery, the Abbot
        Ceolfrid, for lack of fit persons to assist at the daily offices,
        decided to recite the psalms without antiphons, except at vespers and
        matins. But after a week's trial, unable to bear it any longer, he
        restored the antiphons to their proper place, and with the help of
        one little boy carried on the services in the usual manner. This
        little boy is described as being, at the time the History was
        written, a priest of that monastery who <span class="tei tei-q">“duly, both by his words and writings, commends the
        Abbot's praiseworthy deeds to all who seek to know them,”</span> and
        he has generally been supposed to be Bede.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the
        <span class="tei tei-q">“Ecclesiastical History”</span> (IV, 3) there
        is an allusion to Bede's teachers, one of whom, Trumbert, educated at
        Lastingham under Ceadda, is mentioned by name. The monastery of
        Wearmouth and Jarrow must have offered exceptional facilities for
        study. Benedict had enriched it with many treasures which he brought
        with him from his travels. Chief among these was the famous library
        which he founded and which was enlarged by Abbot Ceolfrid. Here Bede
        acquired that wide and varied learning revealed in his historical,
        scientific, and theological works. He studied with particular care
        and reverence the patristic writings; his theological treatises were,
        as he says, <span class="tei tei-q">“compiled out of the works of the
        venerable Fathers.”</span> He must have had a considerable
        <span class="tei tei-pb" id="pagexxxvi">[pg xxxvi]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pgxxxvi"/> knowledge of
        Greek, probably he knew some Hebrew. Though he is not wholly free
        from the mediaeval churchman's distrust of pagan authors, he
        constantly betrays his acquaintance with them, and the sense of form
        which must unconsciously influence the student of classical
        literature has passed into his own writings and preserved him from
        the barbarism of monkish Latin. His style is singularly clear,
        simple, and fluent, as free from obscurity as from affectation and
        bombast.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Thus was the
        foundation laid of that sound learning upon which his widespread
        influence both as a teacher and writer was reared. <span class="tei tei-q">“I always took delight,”</span> he tells us, <span class="tei tei-q">“in learning, or teaching, or writing.”</span> Probably
        his writing was, as is so often the case, the outcome of his
        teaching; his object in both is to meet <span class="tei tei-q">“the
        needs of the brethren.”</span> One of his pupils was Archbishop
        Egbert, the founder of the school of York, which gave a fresh impulse
        to learning, not only in England, but through Alcuin in France, at a
        time when a revival was most to be desired.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">It was to Egbert
        that he paid one of the only two visits which he records. In the
        <span class="tei tei-q">“Epistola ad Ecgbertum”</span> he alludes to
        a short stay he had made with him the year before, and declines, on
        account of the illness which proved to be his last, an invitation to
        visit him again. He visited Lindisfarne in connection with his task
        of writing the life of Cuthbert. Otherwise we have no authentic
        record of any absence from the monastery. The story that he went to
        Rome at the request of Pope Sergius, founded on a statement of
        William of Malmesbury, is now regarded as highly improbable. The
        oldest MS. of the letter of Sergius, requesting Ceolfrid to send one
        of his monks to Rome, has no mention of the name of Bede. If such an
        event had ever disturbed his accustomed course of life, it is
        inconceivable that he should nowhere allude to it. Still less is the
        assertion that he lived and taught at Cambridge one which need be
        seriously debated by the present generation.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">We may fairly
        assume that, except for a few short absences such as the visits to
        York and Lindisfarne, his <span class="tei tei-pb" id="pagexxxvii">[pg xxxvii]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pgxxxvii"/> whole life was spent in the monastery. It
        must have been a life of unremitting toil. His writings, numerous as
        they are, covering a wide range of subjects and involving the
        severest study, can only have been a part of his work; he had,
        besides, his duties as priest, teacher, and member of a religious
        community to fulfil. Even the manual labour of his literary work must
        have been considerable. He did not employ an amanuensis, and he had
        not the advantages with regard to copyists which a member of one of
        the larger monasteries might have had. <span class="tei tei-q">“Ipse
        mihi dictator simul notarius (= shorthand writer) et librarius (=
        copyist),”</span> he writes. Yet he never flags. Through all the
        outward monotony of his days his own interest remains fresh. He
        <span class="tei tei-q">“takes delight”</span> (<span class="tei tei-q">“dulce habui”</span>) in it all. It is a life full of
        eager activity in intellectual things, of a keen and patriotic
        interest in the wider life beyond the monastery walls, which shows
        itself sadly enough in his reflections on the evils of the times, of
        the ardent charity which spends itself in labour for the brethren,
        and, pervading the whole, that spirit of quiet obedience and devotion
        which his own simple words describe as <span class="tei tei-q">“the
        observance of monastic rule and the daily charge of singing in the
        Church.”</span> We can picture him, at the appointed hours, breaking
        off his absorbing occupations to take his place at the daily offices,
        lest, as he believed, he should fail to meet the angels there. Alcuin
        records a saying of his, <span class="tei tei-q">“I know that angels
        visit the canonical hours and the congregations of the brethren. What
        if they do not find me among the brethren? May they not say,
        <span class="tei tei-q">‘Where is Bede?’</span> ”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">It is probably
        here, in this harmony of work and devotion, that we may find the
        secret of the fascination in the record of his uneventful days. It
        reconciles the sharp antithesis between the active and the
        contemplative life. It seems to attain to that ideal of <span class="tei tei-q">“toil unsever'd from tranquillity”</span> which haunts us
        all, but which we have almost ceased to associate with the life of
        man under present conditions. Balance, moderation, or rather, that
        rare quality which has been well called <span class="tei tei-q">“the
        sanity of <span class="tei tei-pb" id="pagexxxviii">[pg
        xxxviii]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pgxxxviii"/> saintliness,”</span><a href="#note_2" id="noteref_2" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">2</span></span></a> these
        give a unity to the life of Bede and preserve him from the
        exaggerations of the conventual ideal. With all his admiration for
        the ascetic life, he recognizes human limitations. It is cheering to
        find that even he felt the need of a holiday. <span class="tei tei-q">“Having completed,”</span> he writes, <span class="tei tei-q">“the third book of the Commentary on Samuel, I thought I
        would rest awhile, and, after recovering in that way my delight in
        study and writing, proceed to take in hand the fourth.”</span>
        Intellectual power commands his homage, but his mind is open to the
        appreciation of all forms of excellence. It is the unlearned brother,
        unfit for study and occupied in manual labour, to whom, in his story,
        it is vouchsafed to hear the singing of the angels who came to summon
        Ceadda to his rest. The life of devotion ranks highest in his
        estimation, but he records with approval how St. Cuthbert thought
        <span class="tei tei-q">“that to afford the weak brethren the help of
        his exhortation stood in the stead of prayer, knowing that He Who
        said <span class="tei tei-q">‘Thou shalt love the Lord thy
        God,’</span> said likewise, <span class="tei tei-q">‘Thou shalt love
        thy neighbour as thyself.’</span> ”</span> He tells us how St.
        Gregory bewailed his own loss in being forced by his office to be
        entangled in worldly affairs. <span class="tei tei-q">“But,”</span>
        adds the human-hearted biographer, <span class="tei tei-q">“it
        behoves us to believe that he lost nothing of his monastic perfection
        by reason of his pastoral charge, but rather that he gained greater
        profit through the labour of converting many, than by the former calm
        of his private life.”</span> Yet he holds that this immunity from the
        evil influence of the world was chiefly due to Gregory's care in
        organizing his house like a monastery and safeguarding the
        opportunities for prayer and devotional study, even while he was
        immersed in affairs at the court of Constantinople, and afterwards,
        when he held the most onerous office in the Church.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">This quality of
        sanity shows itself again in an unusual degree of fairness to
        opponents. The Paschal error, indeed, moves his indignation in a
        manner which is incomprehensible <span class="tei tei-pb" id="pagexxxix">[pg xxxix]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pgxxxix"/> and distasteful to the modern reader, but even
        in the perverse and erring Celts he can recognize <span class="tei tei-q">“a zeal of God, though not according to
        knowledge.”</span> Aidan's holiness of life wins from him a warm
        tribute of admiration. In the monks of Iona, the stronghold of the
        Celtic system, he can perceive the fruit of good works and find an
        excuse for their error in their isolated situation. In the British
        Church it is the lack of missionary zeal, rather than their attitude
        towards the Easter question, which calls forth his strongest
        condemnation.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">A characteristic
        akin to this is his love of truth. As a historian, it shows itself in
        his scrupulous care in investigating evidence and in acknowledging
        the sources from which he draws. Nowhere is his intellectual honesty
        more apparent than in dealing with what he believes to be the
        miraculous element in his history. In whatever way we may regard
        these anecdotes, there can be no doubt that Bede took the utmost
        pains to assure himself of their authenticity. He is careful to
        acquire, if possible, first-hand evidence; where this cannot be
        obtained, he scrupulously mentions the lack of it. He admits only the
        testimony of witnesses of high character and generally quotes them by
        name.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">These are but a
        few of the glimpses afforded us of the personality of Bede, a
        personality never obtruded, but everywhere unconsciously revealed in
        his work. Everywhere we find the impress of a mind of wide
        intellectual grasp, a character of the highest saintliness, and a
        gentle refinement of thought and feeling. The lofty spirituality of
        Bede, his great learning and scholarly attainment are the more
        striking when we reflect how recently his nation had emerged from
        barbarism and received Christianity and the culture which it brought
        with it to these shores.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The letter in
        which he declines Egbert's invitation on the plea of illness is dated
        November, 734. If we may assume that his death took place on the eve
        of Ascension Day in 735, no long period of enfeebled health clouded
        the close of his life, and weakness never interrupted his work. His
        death has been described by his pupil, Cuthbert, who afterwards
        became Abbot of Wearmouth and <span class="tei tei-pb" id="pagexl">[pg xl]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pgxl"/> Jarrow in succession to Huaetbert, in the
        letter quoted below. He was first buried at Jarrow but, according to
        Simeon of Durham, his relics were stolen by the priest, Elfred, and
        carried to Durham. In 1104, when the bones of Cuthbert were
        translated to the new Cathedral, those of Bede were found with them.
        Not long after, Hugh de Puisac erected a shrine of gold and silver,
        adorned with jewels, in which he placed them, along with the relics
        of many other saints. The shrine disappeared at the Reformation, and
        only the stone on which it rested remains.<a href="#note_3" id="noteref_3" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">3</span></span></a></p>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Letter of Cuthbert to
          Cuthwin.</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“To his fellow-lector, Cuthwin, beloved in Christ,
          Cuthbert, his fellow-student, greeting and salvation for ever in
          the Lord. I have very gladly received the gift which thou sentest
          to me, and with much joy have read thy devout and learned letter,
          wherein I found that which I greatly desired, to wit, that masses
          and holy prayers are diligently offered by you for our father and
          master Bede, beloved of God. Wherefore I rejoice, rather for love
          of him than from confidence in my own power, to relate in few words
          after what manner he departed out of this world, understanding also
          that thou hast desired and asked this of me. He was troubled with
          weakness and chiefly with difficulty in breathing, yet almost
          without pain, for about a fortnight before the day of our Lord's
          Resurrection; and thus he afterwards passed his time, cheerful and
          rejoicing, giving thanks to Almighty God every day and night, nay,
          every hour, till the day of our Lord's Ascension, to wit, the
          twenty-sixth day of May, and daily gave lessons to us, his
          disciples; and whatsoever remained of the day he spent in singing
          psalms, as far as he was able; he also strove to pass all the night
          joyfully in prayer and thanksgiving to God, save only when a short
          sleep prevented it; and then he no sooner awoke than he straightway
          began again to repeat the well-known sacred songs, and ceased not
          to give thanks <span class="tei tei-pb" id="pagexli">[pg
          xli]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pgxli"/>
          to God with uplifted hands. I declare with truth that I have never
          seen with my eyes, or heard with my ears, any man so earnest in
          giving thanks to the living God. O truly blessed man! He repeated
          the words of St. Paul the Apostle, <span class="tei tei-q">‘It is a
          fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God,’</span> and
          much more out of Holy Scripture; wherein also he admonished us to
          think of our last hour, and to arise out of the sleep of the soul;
          and being learned in our native poetry, he said also in our tongue,
          concerning the dread parting of souls from the body:</span></p>
<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">Fore then neidfaerae</span>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">naenig uiuurthit</span>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">thonc suotturra</span>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">than him tharf sie</span>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">to ymb hycggannae</span>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">aer his hin iongae</span>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">huaet his gastae</span>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">godaes aeththa yflaes</span>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">aefter deothdaege</span>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">doemid uueorthae.</span>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Which being
          interpreted is: <span class="tei tei-q">“Before the inevitable
          journey hence, no man is wiser than is needful that he may
          consider, ere the soul departs, what good or evil it hath done and
          how it shall be judged after its departure.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“He also sang antiphons for our comfort and his own.
          One of these is, <span class="tei tei-q">‘O King of Glory, Lord of
          all power, Who, triumphing this day, didst ascend above all the
          heavens, leave us not comfortless, but send to us the promise of
          the Father, even the Spirit of Truth—Hallelujah.’</span> And when
          he came to the words, <span class="tei tei-q">‘leave us not
          comfortless,’</span> he burst into tears and wept much. And an hour
          after, he fell to repeating what he had begun. And this he did the
          whole day, and we, hearing it, mourned with him and wept. Now we
          read and now we lamented, nay, we wept even as we read. In such
          rapture we passed the fifty days' festival<a href="#note_4" id="noteref_4" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">4</span></span></a> till
          the aforesaid day; and he rejoiced greatly and gave God thanks,
          because he had been accounted worthy to suffer such weakness. And
          he often said, <span class="tei tei-q">‘God scourgeth every son
          whom He <span class="tei tei-pb" id="pagexlii">[pg
          xlii]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pgxlii"/> receiveth’</span>; and the words of St.
          Ambrose, <span class="tei tei-q">‘I have not so lived as to be
          ashamed to live among you; but neither do I fear to die, because we
          have a merciful Lord.’</span> And during those days, besides the
          lessons we had daily from him, and the singing of the Psalms, there
          were two memorable works, which he strove to finish; to wit, his
          translation of the Gospel of St. John, from the beginning, as far
          as the words, <span class="tei tei-q">‘But what are they among so
          many?’</span> into our own tongue, for the benefit of the Church of
          God; and some selections from the books of Bishop Isidore, saying,
          <span class="tei tei-q">‘I would not have my boys read a lie, nor
          labour herein without profit after my death.’</span></span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“When the Tuesday before the Ascension of our Lord
          came, he began to suffer still more in his breathing, and there was
          some swelling in his feet. But he went on teaching all that day and
          dictating cheerfully, and now and then said among other things,
          <span class="tei tei-q">‘Learn quickly, I know not how long I shall
          endure, and whether my Maker will not soon take me away.’</span>
          But to us it seemed that haply he knew well the time of his
          departure; and so he spent the night, awake, in giving of thanks.
          And when the morning dawned, that is, on the Wednesday, he bade us
          write with all speed what we had begun. And this we did until the
          third hour. And from the third hour we walked in procession with
          the relics of the saints, according to the custom of that
          day.<a href="#note_5" id="noteref_5" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">5</span></span></a> And
          there was one of us with him who said to him, <span class="tei tei-q">‘There is still one chapter wanting of the book which
          thou hast been dictating, but I deem it burdensome for thee to be
          questioned any further.’</span> He answered, <span class="tei tei-q">‘Nay, it is light, take thy pen and make ready, and
          write quickly.’</span> And this was done. But at the ninth hour he
          said to me, <span class="tei tei-q">‘I have certain treasures in my
          coffer, some spices, napkins and incense; run quickly and bring the
          priests of our monastery to me, that I may distribute among them
          the gifts which God has bestowed on me.’</span> And this I did
          trembling, and when they were come, he spoke to every one of them,
          admonishing and entreating them <span class="tei tei-pb" id="pagexliii">[pg xliii]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pgxliii"/> that they should diligently offer masses and
          prayers for him, and they promised readily. But they all mourned
          and wept, sorrowing most of all for the words which he spake,
          because they thought that they should see his face no long time in
          this world. But they rejoiced for that he said, <span class="tei tei-q">‘It is time for me, if it be my Maker's will, to be set
          free from the flesh, and come to Him Who, when as yet I was not,
          formed me out of nothing. I have lived long; and well has my
          pitiful judge disposed my life for me; the time of my release is at
          hand; for my soul longs to see Christ my King in His
          beauty.’</span> Having said this and much more for our profit and
          edification, he passed his last day in gladness till the evening;
          and the aforesaid boy, whose name was Wilbert, still said,
          <span class="tei tei-q">‘Dear master, there is yet one sentence not
          written.’</span> He answered, <span class="tei tei-q">‘It is well,
          write it.’</span> Soon after, the boy said, <span class="tei tei-q">‘Now it is written.’</span> And he said, <span class="tei tei-q">‘It is well, thou hast said truly, it is finished. Take
          my head in thy hands, for I rejoice greatly to sit facing my holy
          place where I was wont to pray, that I too, sitting there, may call
          upon my Father.’</span> And thus on the pavement of his little
          cell, chanting <span class="tei tei-q">‘Glory be to the Father, and
          to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost,’</span> and the rest, he
          breathed his last.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And without doubt we must believe that inasmuch as he
          had always been devout and earnest on earth in the praise of God,
          his soul was carried by angels to the joys of Heaven which he
          desired. And all who heard him or beheld the death of our father
          Bede, said that they had never seen any other end his life in so
          great devotion and peace. For, as thou hast heard, so long as the
          soul abode in the body, he chanted the <span class="tei tei-q">‘Gloria Patri’</span> and other words to the glory of
          God, and with outstretched hands ceased not to give thanks to
          God.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But know this, that much could be told and written
          concerning him, but my want of learning cuts short my words.
          Nevertheless, with the help of God, I purpose at leisure to write
          more fully concerning him, of those things which I saw with my own
          eyes and heard with my own ears.”</span></p>
</div>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="pagexlv">[pg xlv]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pgxlv"/>
<hr class="page"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 5.00em; margin-top: 5.00em">
<a id="toc7"/> <a id="pdf8"/>
<h1 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 3.46em; margin-top: 3.46em">
<span style="font-size: 173%">Errata</span></h1>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Page <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg009">9</a>, headline, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">for</span></span>
<span class="tei tei-q">“54 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">read</span></span>
<span class="tei tei-q">“54 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">b.c.</span></span>”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Page <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg021">21</a>, headline, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">for</span></span>
<span class="tei tei-q">“394 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">read</span></span>
<span class="tei tei-q">“395 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Page <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg214">214</a>, note 4, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">for</span></span>
<span class="tei tei-q">“cc.”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">read</span></span>
<span class="tei tei-q">“pp.”</span> [Transcriber's Note: This is the
        footnote to Bright.]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Page <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg215">215</a>, note 1, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">for</span></span>
<span class="tei tei-q">“St. James <span class="tei tei-q">‘the
        Less’</span> ”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">read</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“James, <span class="tei tei-q">‘the Lord's
        brother.’</span> ”</span> [Transcriber's Note: This is the footnote
        to <span class="tei tei-q">“the Eastern.”</span>]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Page <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg220">220</a>, note 2, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">for</span></span>
<span class="tei tei-q">“Lumley”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">read</span></span>
<span class="tei tei-q">“Lumby.”</span> [Transcriber's Note: This is
        the footnote starting <span class="tei tei-q">“A stone.”</span>]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Page <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg254">254</a>, note 1, line 4, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">for</span></span>
<span class="tei tei-q">“existence”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">read</span></span>
<span class="tei tei-q">“co-existence.”</span> [Transcriber's Note:
        This is the footnote starting <span class="tei tei-q">“Eutyches was
        Archimandrite.”</span>]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Page <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg316">316</a>, line 7, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">for</span></span>
<span class="tei tei-q">“Gedmund”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">read</span></span>
<span class="tei tei-q">“Gebmund.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Page <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg346">346</a>, note 6, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">for</span></span>
<span class="tei tei-q">“p. 56”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">read</span></span>
<span class="tei tei-q">“p. 356.”</span> [Transcriber's Note: This is
        the footnote starting <span class="tei tei-q">“Ripon, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.
        infra</span></span>”</span>]</p>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page001">[pg 001]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg001"/>
<hr class="page"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 5.00em; margin-top: 5.00em">
<a id="toc9"/> <a id="pdf10"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Preface"/>
<h1 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 3.46em; margin-top: 3.46em">
<span style="font-size: 173%">Preface</span></h1>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">To the most glorious
        king Ceolwulf.</span><a href="#note_6" id="noteref_6" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; font-style: italic; vertical-align: super">6</span></span></a>
<span style="font-style: italic">Bede, the servant of Christ and
        Priest.</span></span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">I formerly, at
        your request, most readily sent to you the Ecclesiastical History of
        the English Nation, which I had lately published, for you to read and
        judge; and I now send it again to be transcribed, and more fully
        studied at your leisure. And I rejoice greatly at the sincerity and
        zeal, with which you not only diligently give ear to hear the words
        of Holy Scripture, but also industriously take care to become
        acquainted with the actions and sayings of former men of renown,
        especially of our own nation. For if history relates good things of
        good men, the attentive hearer is excited to imitate that which is
        good; or if it recounts evil things of wicked persons, none the less
        the conscientious and devout hearer or reader, shunning that which is
        hurtful and wrong, is the more earnestly fired to perform those
        things which he knows to be good, and worthy of the service of God.
        And as you have carefully marked this, you are desirous that the said
        history should be more fully made known to yourself, and to those
        over whom the Divine Authority has appointed you governor, from your
        great regard to the common good. But to the end that I may remove all
        occasion of doubting what I have written, both from <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page002">[pg 002]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg002"/> yourself and other readers or hearers of
        this history, I will take care briefly to show you from what authors
        I chiefly learned the same.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">My principal
        authority and aid in this work was the most learned and reverend
        Abbot Albinus;<a href="#note_7" id="noteref_7" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">7</span></span></a> who,
        educated in the Church of Canterbury by those venerable and learned
        men, Archbishop Theodore<a href="#note_8" id="noteref_8" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">8</span></span></a> of
        blessed memory, and the Abbot Hadrian,<a href="#note_9" id="noteref_9" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">9</span></span></a>
        transmitted to me by Nothelm,<a href="#note_10" id="noteref_10" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">10</span></span></a> the
        pious priest of the Church of London, either in writing, or by word
        of mouth of the same Nothelm, all that he thought worthy of memory
        that had been done in the province of Kent, or the adjacent parts, by
        the disciples of the blessed Pope Gregory,<a href="#note_11" id="noteref_11" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">11</span></span></a> as he
        had learned the same either from written records, or the traditions
        of his predecessors. The same Nothelm, afterwards went to Rome, and
        having, with leave of the present Pope Gregory,<a href="#note_12" id="noteref_12" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">12</span></span></a> searched
        into the archives of the Holy Roman Church, found there some epistles
        of the blessed Pope Gregory, and other popes; and, returning home, by
        the advice of the aforesaid most reverend father Albinus, brought
        them to me, to be inserted in my history. Thus, from the beginning of
        this volume to the time when the English nation received the faith of
        Christ, we have acquired matter from the writings of former men,
        <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page003">[pg 003]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg003"/> gathered from various sources;
        but from that time till the present, what was transacted in the
        Church of Canterbury by the disciples of the blessed Pope Gregory or
        their successors, and under what kings the same happened, has been
        conveyed to us, as we have said, by Nothelm through the industry of
        the aforesaid Abbot Albinus. They also partly informed me by what
        bishops and under what kings the provinces of the East and West
        Saxons, as also of the East Angles, and of the Northumbrians,
        received the grace of the Gospel. In short, I was chiefly encouraged
        to undertake this work by the exhortations of the same Albinus. In
        like manner, Daniel,<a href="#note_13" id="noteref_13" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">13</span></span></a> the most
        reverend Bishop of the West Saxons, who is still living, communicated
        to me in writing some things relating to the Ecclesiastical History
        of that province, and the adjoining one of the South Saxons, as also
        of the Isle of Wight. But how, by the ministry of those holy priests
        of Christ, Cedd<a href="#note_14" id="noteref_14" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">14</span></span></a> and
        Ceadda,<a href="#note_15" id="noteref_15" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">15</span></span></a> the
        province of the Mercians was brought to the faith of Christ, which
        they knew not before, and how that of the East Saxons recovered the
        faith after having rejected it, and how those fathers lived and died,
        we learned from the brethren of the monastery, which was built by
        them, and is called Laestingaeu.<a href="#note_16" id="noteref_16" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">16</span></span></a> Further,
        what ecclesiastical matters took place in the province of the East
        Angles, was partly made known to us from the writings and tradition
        of former men, and partly by the account of the most reverend Abbot
        Esi.<a href="#note_17" id="noteref_17" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">17</span></span></a> What was
        done with regard to the faith of Christ, and what was the episcopal
        succession in the province of Lindsey,<a href="#note_18" id="noteref_18" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">18</span></span></a> we had
        either from the letters of the most reverend <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page004">[pg 004]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg004"/> prelate Cynibert,<a href="#note_19" id="noteref_19" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">19</span></span></a> or by
        word of mouth from other persons of good credit. But what was done in
        the Church in the different parts of the province of Northumbria from
        the time when they received the faith of Christ till this present, I
        received not on the authority of any one man, but by the faithful
        testimony of innumerable witnesses, who might know or remember the
        same; besides what I had of my own knowledge. Wherein it is to be
        observed, that what I have written concerning our most holy father,
        Bishop Cuthbert,<a href="#note_20" id="noteref_20" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">20</span></span></a> either
        in this volume, or in my account of his life and actions, I partly
        took from what I found written of him by the brethren of the Church
        of Lindisfarne,<a href="#note_21" id="noteref_21" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">21</span></span></a>
        accepting without reserve the statements I found there; but at the
        same time took care to add such things as I could myself have
        knowledge of by the faithful testimony of trustworthy informants. And
        I humbly entreat the reader, that if he shall find in these our
        writings anything not delivered according to the truth, he will not
        lay the blame of it on me, for, as the true rule of history requires,
        withholding nothing, I have laboured to commit to writing such things
        as I could gather from common report, for the instruction of
        posterity.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Moreover, I
        beseech all men who shall hear or read this history of our nation,
        that for my infirmities both of mind and body, they will offer up
        frequent intercessions to the throne of Grace. And I further pray,
        that in recompense for the labour wherewith I have recorded in the
        several provinces and more important places those events which I
        considered worthy of note and of interest to their inhabitants, I may
        for my reward have the benefit of their pious prayers.</p>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page005">[pg 005]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg005"/>
<hr class="page"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 5.00em; margin-top: 5.00em">
<a id="toc11"/> <a id="pdf12"/>
<h1 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 3.46em; margin-top: 3.46em">
<span style="font-size: 173%">Book I</span></h1>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc13"/> <a id="pdf14"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_I_Chap_I"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. I. Of the Situation of Britain
          and Ireland, and of their ancient inhabitants.</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Britain, an
          island in the Atlantic, formerly called Albion, lies to the
          north-west, facing, though at a considerable distance, the coasts
          of Germany, France, and Spain, which form the greatest part of
          Europe. It extends 800 miles in length towards the north, and is
          200 miles in breadth, except where several promontories extend
          further in breadth, by which its compass is made to be 4,875
          miles.<a href="#note_22" id="noteref_22" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">22</span></span></a> To the
          south lies Belgic Gaul. To its nearest shore there is an easy
          passage from the city of Rutubi Portus, by the English now
          corrupted into Reptacaestir.<a href="#note_23" id="noteref_23" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">23</span></span></a> The
          distance from here across the sea to Gessoriacum,<a href="#note_24" id="noteref_24" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">24</span></span></a> the
          nearest shore in the territory of the Morini,<a href="#note_25" id="noteref_25" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">25</span></span></a> is
          fifty miles, or as some writers say, 450 furlongs. On the other
          side of the island, where it opens upon the boundless ocean, it has
          the islands called Orcades. Britain is rich in grain and trees, and
          is well adapted for feeding cattle and beasts of burden. It also
          produces vines in some places, and has plenty of land and water
          fowl of divers sorts; it is remarkable also for rivers abounding in
          fish, and plentiful springs. It has the greatest plenty of salmon
          and eels; seals are also frequently taken, and dolphins, as also
          whales; besides many sorts of shell-fish, such as mussels, in which
          are often found excellent pearls of all colours, red, purple,
          violet and green, but chiefly white. There is also a great
          abundance of snails, of which the scarlet dye is made, a most
          beautiful red, which never fades with the heat of the sun or
          exposure to rain, but the older it is, the more beautiful it
          becomes. It has both salt and hot <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page006">[pg 006]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg006"/> springs, and from them flow rivers which
          furnish hot baths, proper for all ages and both sexes, in separate
          places, according to their requirements. For water, as St. Basil
          says,<a href="#note_26" id="noteref_26" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">26</span></span></a>
          receives the quality of heat, when it runs along certain metals,
          and becomes not only hot but scalding. Britain is rich also in
          veins of metals, as copper, iron, lead, and silver; it produces a
          great deal of excellent jet, which is black and sparkling, and
          burns when put to the fire, and when set on fire, drives away
          serpents; being warmed with rubbing, it attracts whatever is
          applied to it, like amber. The island was formerly distinguished by
          twenty-eight famous cities, besides innumerable forts, which were
          all strongly secured with walls, towers, gates, and bars. And,
          because it lies almost under the North Pole, the nights are light
          in summer, so that at midnight the beholders are often in doubt
          whether the evening twilight still continues, or that of the
          morning has come; since the sun at night returns to the east in the
          northern regions without passing far beneath the earth. For this
          reason the days are of a great length in summer, and on the other
          hand, the nights in winter are eighteen hours long, for the sun
          then withdraws into southern parts. In like manner the nights are
          very short in summer, and the days in winter, that is, only six
          equinoctial hours. Whereas, in Armenia, Macedonia, Italy, and other
          countries of the same latitude, the longest day or night extends
          but to fifteen hours, and the shortest to nine.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">There are in the
          island at present, following the number of the books in which the
          Divine Law was written, five<a href="#note_27" id="noteref_27" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">27</span></span></a>
          languages of different nations employed in the study and confession
          of the one self-same knowledge, which is of highest truth and true
          sublimity, to wit, English, British, Scottish, Pictish, and Latin,
          the last having become common to all by the study of the
          Scriptures. But at first this island had no other inhabitants but
          the Britons, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page007">[pg
          007]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg007"/>
          from whom it derived its name, and who, coming over into Britain,
          as is reported, from Armorica,<a href="#note_28" id="noteref_28" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">28</span></span></a>
          possessed themselves of the southern parts thereof. Starting from
          the south, they had occupied the greater part of the island, when
          it happened, that the nation of the Picts, putting to sea from
          Scythia,<a href="#note_29" id="noteref_29" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">29</span></span></a> as is
          reported, in a few ships of war, and being driven by the winds
          beyond the bounds of Britain, came to Ireland and landed on its
          northern shores. There, finding the nation of the Scots, they
          begged to be allowed to settle among them, but could not succeed in
          obtaining their request. Ireland is the largest island next to
          Britain, and lies to the west of it; but as it is shorter than
          Britain to the north, so, on the other hand, it runs out far beyond
          it to the south, over against the northern part of Spain, though a
          wide sea lies between them. The Picts then, as has been said,
          arriving in this island by sea, desired to have a place granted
          them in which they might settle. The Scots answered that the island
          could not contain them both; but <span class="tei tei-q">“We can
          give you good counsel,”</span> said they, <span class="tei tei-q">“whereby you may know what to do; we know there is
          another island, not far from ours, to the eastward, which we often
          see at a distance, when the days are clear. If you will go thither,
          you can obtain settlements; or, if any should oppose you, we will
          help you.”</span> The Picts, accordingly, sailing over into
          Britain, began to inhabit the northern parts <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page008">[pg 008]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg008"/> thereof, for the Britons had possessed
          themselves of the southern. Now the Picts had no wives, and asked
          them of the Scots; who would not consent to grant them upon any
          other terms, than that when any question should arise, they should
          choose a king from the female royal race rather than from the male:
          which custom, as is well known, has been observed among the Picts
          to this day.<a href="#note_30" id="noteref_30" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">30</span></span></a> In
          process of time, Britain, besides the Britons and the Picts,
          received a third nation, the Scots, who, migrating from Ireland
          under their leader, Reuda, either by fair means, or by force of
          arms, secured to themselves those settlements among the Picts which
          they still possess. From the name of their commander, they are to
          this day called Dalreudini; for, in their language, Dal signifies a
          part.<a href="#note_31" id="noteref_31" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">31</span></span></a></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Ireland is
          broader than Britain and has a much healthier and milder climate;
          for the snow scarcely ever lies there above three days: no man
          makes hay in the summer for winter's provision, or builds stables
          for his beasts of burden. No reptiles are found there, and no snake
          can live there; for, though snakes are often carried thither out of
          Britain, as soon as the ship comes near the shore, and the scent of
          the air reaches them, they die. On the contrary, almost all things
          in the island are efficacious against poison. In truth, we have
          known that when men have been bitten by serpents, the scrapings of
          leaves of books that were brought out of Ireland, being put into
          water, and given them to drink, have immediately absorbed the
          spreading poison, and assuaged the swelling.</p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page009">[pg 009]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg009"/>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The island
          abounds in milk and honey, nor is there any lack of vines, fish, or
          fowl; and it is noted for the hunting of stags and roe-deer. It is
          properly the country of the Scots, who, migrating from thence, as
          has been said, formed the third nation in Britain in addition to
          the Britons and the Picts.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">There is a very
          large gulf of the sea, which formerly divided the nation of the
          Britons from the Picts; it runs from the west far into the land,
          where, to this day, stands a strong city of the Britons, called
          Alcluith.<a href="#note_32" id="noteref_32" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">32</span></span></a> The
          Scots, arriving on the north side of this bay, settled themselves
          there.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc15"/> <a id="pdf16"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_I_Chap_II"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. II. How Caius Julius Caesar was
          the first Roman that came into Britain.</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Now Britain had
          never been visited by the Romans, and was entirely unknown to them
          before the time of Caius Julius Caesar, who, in the year 693 after
          the foundation of Rome, but the sixtieth year<a href="#note_33" id="noteref_33" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">33</span></span></a> before
          the Incarnation of our Lord, was consul with Lucius Bibulus. While
          he was making war upon the Germans and the Gauls, who were divided
          only by the river Rhine, he came into the province of the Morini,
          whence is the nearest and shortest passage into Britain. Here,
          having provided about eighty ships of burden and fast-sailing
          vessels, he sailed over into Britain; where, being first roughly
          handled in a battle, and then caught in a storm, he lost a
          considerable part of his fleet, no small number of foot-soldiers,
          and almost all his cavalry. Returning into Gaul, he put his legions
          into winter-quarters, and gave orders for building six hundred sail
          of both sorts. With these he again crossed over early in spring
          into Britain, but, whilst he was marching with the army against the
          enemy, the ships, riding at anchor, were caught in a storm and
          either dashed one against another, or driven upon the sands and
          wrecked. Forty of them were lost, the rest <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page010">[pg 010]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg010"/> were, with much difficulty, repaired.
          Caesar's cavalry was, at the first encounter, defeated by the
          Britons, and there Labienus, the tribune, was slain. In the second
          engagement, with great hazard to his men, he defeated the Britons
          and put them to flight. Thence he proceeded to the river Thames,
          where a great multitude of the enemy had posted themselves on the
          farther side of the river, under the command of
          Cassobellaunus,<a href="#note_34" id="noteref_34" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">34</span></span></a> and
          fenced the bank of the river and almost all the ford under water
          with sharp stakes: the remains of these are to be seen to this day,
          apparently about the thickness of a man's thigh, cased with lead,
          and fixed immovably in the bottom of the river. This being
          perceived and avoided by the Romans, the barbarians, not able to
          stand the charge of the legions, hid themselves in the woods,
          whence they grievously harassed the Romans with repeated sallies.
          In the meantime, the strong state of the Trinovantes,<a href="#note_35" id="noteref_35" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">35</span></span></a> with
          their commander Androgius,<a href="#note_36" id="noteref_36" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">36</span></span></a>
          surrendered to Caesar, giving him forty hostages. Many other
          cities, following their example, made a treaty with the Romans.
          Guided by them, Caesar at length, after severe fighting, took the
          town of Cassobellaunus,<a href="#note_37" id="noteref_37" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">37</span></span></a>
          situated between two marshes, fortified by sheltering woods, and
          plentifully furnished with all necessaries. After this, Caesar
          returned from Britain into Gaul, but he had no sooner put his
          legions into winter quarters, than he was suddenly beset and
          distracted with wars and sudden risings on every side.</p>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page011">[pg 011]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg011"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc17"/> <a id="pdf18"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_I_Chap_III"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. III. How Claudius, the second
          of the Romans who came into Britain, brought the islands Orcades
          into subjection to the Roman empire; and Vespasian, sent by him,
          reduced the Isle of Wight under the dominion of the
          Romans.</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year of
          Rome 798,<a href="#note_38" id="noteref_38" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">38</span></span></a>
          Claudius, fourth emperor from Augustus, being desirous to approve
          himself a prince beneficial to the republic, and eagerly bent upon
          war and conquest on every side, undertook an expedition into
          Britain, which as it appeared, was roused to rebellion by the
          refusal of the Romans to give up certain deserters. No one before
          or after Julius Caesar had dared to land upon the island. Claudius
          crossed over to it, and within a very few days, without any
          fighting or bloodshed, the greater part of the island was
          surrendered into his hands. He also added to the Roman empire the
          Orcades,<a href="#note_39" id="noteref_39" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">39</span></span></a> which
          lie in the ocean beyond Britain, and, returning to Rome in the
          sixth month after his departure, he gave his son the title of
          Britannicus. This war he concluded in the fourth year of his reign,
          which is the forty-sixth from the Incarnation of our Lord. In which
          year there came to pass a most grievous famine in Syria, which is
          recorded in the Acts of the Apostles to have been foretold by the
          prophet Agabus.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Vespasian,<a href="#note_40" id="noteref_40" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">40</span></span></a> who
          was emperor after Nero, being sent into Britain by the same
          Claudius, brought also under the Roman dominion the Isle of Wight,
          which is close to Britain on the south, and is about thirty miles
          in length from east to west, and twelve from north to south; being
          six miles distant from the southern coast of Britain at the east
          end, and three at the west. Nero, succeeding Claudius in the
          empire, undertook no wars at all; and, therefore, among countless
          other disasters brought by him upon the Roman state, he almost lost
          Britain; for <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page012">[pg
          012]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg012"/>
          in his time two most notable towns were there taken and
          destroyed.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc19"/> <a id="pdf20"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_I_Chap_IV"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. IV. How Lucius, king of
          Britain, writing to Pope Eleutherus, desired to be made a
          Christian.</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year of
          our Lord 156, Marcus Antoninus Verus,<a href="#note_41" id="noteref_41" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">41</span></span></a> the
          fourteenth from Augustus, was made emperor, together with his
          brother, Aurelius Commodus. In their time, whilst the holy
          Eleutherus presided over the Roman Church, Lucius, king of Britain,
          sent a letter to him, entreating that by a mandate from him he
          might be made a Christian.<a href="#note_42" id="noteref_42" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">42</span></span></a> He
          soon obtained his pious request, and the Britons preserved the
          faith, which they had received, uncorrupted and entire, in peace
          and tranquillity until the time of the Emperor Diocletian.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc21"/> <a id="pdf22"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_I_Chap_V"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. V. How the Emperor Severus
          divided from the rest by a rampart that part of Britain which had
          been recovered.</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year of
          our Lord 189, Severus, an African, born at Leptis, in the province
          of Tripolis, became emperor.<a href="#note_43" id="noteref_43" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">43</span></span></a> He was
          the seventeenth from Augustus, and reigned seventeen years. Being
          naturally of a harsh disposition, and engaged in many wars, he
          governed the state vigorously, but with much trouble. Having been
          victorious in all the grievous civil wars which happened in his
          time, he was drawn into Britain by the revolt of almost all the
          confederated tribes; and, after many great and severe battles, he
          thought fit to divide that part of the island, which he had
          recovered, from the other unconquered nations, not <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page013">[pg 013]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg013"/> with a wall, as some imagine, but with
          a rampart.<a href="#note_44" id="noteref_44" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">44</span></span></a> For a
          wall is made of stones, but a rampart, with which camps are
          fortified to repel the assaults of enemies, is made of sods, cut
          out of the earth, and raised high above the ground, like a wall,
          having in front of it the trench whence the sods were taken, with
          strong stakes of wood fixed above it. Thus Severus drew a great
          trench and strong rampart, fortified with several towers, from sea
          to sea. And there, at York, he fell sick afterwards and died,
          leaving two sons, Bassianus and Geta;<a href="#note_45" id="noteref_45" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">45</span></span></a> of
          whom Geta died, adjudged an enemy of the State; but Bassianus,
          having taken the surname of Antonius, obtained the empire.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc23"/> <a id="pdf24"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_I_Chap_VI"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. VI. Of the reign of Diocletian,
          and how he persecuted the Christians.</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year of
          our Lord 286,<a href="#note_46" id="noteref_46" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">46</span></span></a>
          Diocletian, the thirty-third from Augustus, and chosen emperor by
          the army, reigned twenty years, and created Maximian, surnamed
          Herculius, his colleague in the empire. In their time, one
          Carausius,<a href="#note_47" id="noteref_47" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">47</span></span></a> of
          very mean birth, but a man of great ability and energy, being
          appointed to guard the sea-coasts, then infested by the Franks and
          Saxons, acted more to the prejudice than to the advantage of the
          commonwealth, by not restoring to its owners any of the booty taken
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page014">[pg 014]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg014"/> from the robbers,
          but keeping all to himself; thus giving rise to the suspicion that
          by intentional neglect he suffered the enemy to infest the
          frontiers. When, therefore, an order was sent by Maximian that he
          should be put to death, he took upon him the imperial purple, and
          possessed himself of Britain, and having most valiantly conquered
          and held it for the space of seven years, he was at length put to
          death by the treachery of his associate Allectus.<a href="#note_48" id="noteref_48" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">48</span></span></a> The
          usurper, having thus got the island from Carausius, held it three
          years, and was then vanquished by Asclepiodotus,<a href="#note_49" id="noteref_49" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">49</span></span></a> the
          captain of the Praetorian guards, who thus at the end of ten years
          restored Britain to the Roman empire.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Meanwhile,
          Diocletian in the east, and Maximian Herculius in the west,
          commanded the churches to be destroyed, and the Christians to be
          persecuted and slain. This persecution was the tenth since the
          reign of Nero, and was more lasting and cruel than almost any
          before it; for it was carried on incessantly for the space of ten
          years, with burning of churches, proscription of innocent persons,
          and the slaughter of martyrs. Finally, Britain also attained to the
          great glory of bearing faithful witness to God.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc25"/> <a id="pdf26"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. VII. The Passion of St. Alban
          and his companions, who at that time shed their blood for our
          Lord.</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At that time
          suffered St. Alban,<a href="#note_50" id="noteref_50" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">50</span></span></a> of
          whom the priest Fortunatus,<a href="#note_51" id="noteref_51" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">51</span></span></a> in the
          Praise of Virgins, where he makes <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page015">[pg 015]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg015"/> mention of the blessed martyrs that came to
          the Lord from all parts of the world, says:</p>
<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">And fruitful Britain noble Alban
                rears.</span>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">This Alban,
          being yet a pagan, at the time when at the bidding of unbelieving
          rulers all manner of cruelty was practised against the Christians,
          gave entertainment in his house to a certain clerk,<a href="#note_52" id="noteref_52" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">52</span></span></a> flying
          from his persecutors. This man he observed to be engaged in
          continual prayer and watching day and night; when on a sudden the
          Divine grace shining on him, he began to imitate the example of
          faith and piety which was set before him, and being gradually
          instructed by his wholesome admonitions, he cast off the darkness
          of idolatry, and became a Christian in all sincerity of heart. The
          aforesaid clerk having been some days entertained by him, it came
          to the ears of the impious prince, that a confessor of Christ, to
          whom a martyr's place had not yet been assigned, was concealed at
          Alban's house. Whereupon he sent some soldiers to make a strict
          search after him. When they came to the martyr's hut, St. Alban
          presently came forth to the soldiers, instead of his guest and
          master, in the habit or long coat which he wore, and was bound and
          led before the judge.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">It happened that
          the judge, at the time when Alban was carried before him, was
          standing at the altar, and offering sacrifice to devils. When he
          saw Alban, being much enraged that he should thus, of his own
          accord, dare to put himself into the hands of the soldiers, and
          incur such danger on behalf of the guest whom he had harboured, he
          commanded him to be dragged to the images of the devils, before
          which he stood, saying, <span class="tei tei-q">“Because you have
          chosen to conceal a rebellious and sacrilegious man, rather than to
          deliver him up to the soldiers, that his contempt of the gods might
          meet with the penalty due to such blasphemy, you shall undergo all
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page016">[pg 016]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg016"/> the punishment that
          was due to him, if you seek to abandon the worship of our
          religion.”</span> But St. Alban, who had voluntarily declared
          himself a Christian to the persecutors of the faith, was not at all
          daunted by the prince's threats, but putting on the armour of
          spiritual warfare, publicly declared that he would not obey his
          command. Then said the judge, <span class="tei tei-q">“Of what
          family or race are you?”</span>—<span class="tei tei-q">“What does
          it concern you,”</span> answered Alban, <span class="tei tei-q">“of
          what stock I am? If you desire to hear the truth of my religion, be
          it known to you, that I am now a Christian, and free to fulfil
          Christian duties.”</span>—<span class="tei tei-q">“I ask your
          name,”</span> said the judge; <span class="tei tei-q">“tell me it
          immediately.”</span>—<span class="tei tei-q">“I am called Alban by
          my parents,”</span> replied he; <span class="tei tei-q">“and I
          worship ever and adore the true and living God, Who created all
          things.”</span> Then the judge, filled with anger, said,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“If you would enjoy the happiness of
          eternal life, do not delay to offer sacrifice to the great
          gods.”</span> Alban rejoined, <span class="tei tei-q">“These
          sacrifices, which by you are offered to devils, neither can avail
          the worshippers, nor fulfil the desires and petitions of the
          suppliants. Rather, whosoever shall offer sacrifice to these
          images, shall receive the everlasting pains of hell for his
          reward.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The judge,
          hearing these words, and being much incensed, ordered this holy
          confessor of God to be scourged by the executioners, believing that
          he might by stripes shake that constancy of heart, on which he
          could not prevail by words. He, being most cruelly tortured, bore
          the same patiently, or rather joyfully, for our Lord's sake. When
          the judge perceived that he was not to be overcome by tortures, or
          withdrawn from the exercise of the Christian religion, he ordered
          him to be put to death. Being led to execution, he came to a river,
          which, with a most rapid course, ran between the wall of the town
          and the arena where he was to be executed.<a href="#note_53" id="noteref_53" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">53</span></span></a> He
          there saw a great multitude of persons of both sexes, and of divers
          ages and conditions, who were doubtless assembled by Divine
          inspiration, to attend the blessed confessor and martyr,
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page017">[pg 017]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg017"/> and had so filled
          the bridge over the river, that he could scarce pass over that
          evening. In truth, almost all had gone out, so that the judge
          remained in the city without attendance. St. Alban, therefore,
          urged by an ardent and devout wish to attain the sooner to
          martyrdom, drew near to the stream, and lifted up his eyes to
          heaven, whereupon the channel was immediately dried up, and he
          perceived that the water had given place and made way for him to
          pass. Among the rest, the executioner, who should have put him to
          death, observed this, and moved doubtless by Divine inspiration
          hastened to meet him at the appointed place of execution, and
          casting away the sword which he had carried ready drawn, fell at
          his feet, praying earnestly that he might rather be accounted
          worthy to suffer with the martyr, whom he was ordered to execute,
          or, if possible, instead of him.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Whilst he was
          thus changed from a persecutor into a companion in the faith and
          truth, and the other executioners rightly hesitated to take up the
          sword which was lying on the ground, the holy confessor,
          accompanied by the multitude, ascended a hill, about half a mile
          from the arena, beautiful, as was fitting, and of most pleasing
          appearance, adorned, or rather clothed, everywhere with flowers of
          many colours, nowhere steep or precipitous or of sheer descent, but
          with a long, smooth natural slope, like a plain, on its sides, a
          place altogether worthy from of old, by reason of its native
          beauty, to be consecrated by the blood of a blessed martyr. On the
          top of this hill, St. Alban prayed that God would give him water,
          and immediately a living spring, confined in its channel, sprang up
          at his feet, so that all men acknowledged that even the stream had
          yielded its service to the martyr. For it was impossible that the
          martyr, who had left no water remaining in the river, should desire
          it on the top of the hill, unless he thought it fitting. The river
          then having done service and fulfilled the pious duty, returned to
          its natural course, leaving a testimony of its obedience.<a href="#note_54" id="noteref_54" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">54</span></span></a> Here,
          therefore, the head of the undaunted martyr was <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page018">[pg 018]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg018"/> struck off, and here he received the
          crown of life, which God has promised to them that love him. But he
          who laid impious hands on the holy man's neck was not permitted to
          rejoice over his dead body; for his eyes dropped upon the ground at
          the same moment as the blessed martyr's head fell.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At the same time
          was also beheaded the soldier, who before, through the Divine
          admonition, refused to strike the holy confessor. Of whom it is
          apparent, that though he was not purified by the waters of baptism,
          yet he was cleansed by the washing of his own blood, and rendered
          worthy to enter the kingdom of heaven. Then the judge, astonished
          at the unwonted sight of so many heavenly miracles, ordered the
          persecution to cease immediately, and began to honour the death of
          the saints, by which he once thought that they might have been
          turned from their zeal for the Christian faith. The blessed Alban
          suffered death on the twenty-second day of June, near the city of
          Verulam,<a href="#note_55" id="noteref_55" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">55</span></span></a> which
          is now by the English nation called Verlamacaestir, or
          Vaeclingacaestir, where afterwards, when peaceable Christian times
          were restored, a church of wonderful workmanship, and altogether
          worthy to commemorate his martyrdom, was erected.<a href="#note_56" id="noteref_56" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">56</span></span></a> In
          which place the cure of sick persons and the frequent working of
          wonders cease not to this day.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At that time
          suffered Aaron and Julius,<a href="#note_57" id="noteref_57" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">57</span></span></a>
          citizens of the City of Legions,<a href="#note_58" id="noteref_58" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">58</span></span></a> and
          many more of both sexes in divers places; who, after that they had
          endured sundry torments, and their limbs had been mangled after an
          unheard-of <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page019">[pg
          019]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg019"/>
          manner, when their warfare was accomplished, yielded their souls up
          to the joys of the heavenly city.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc27"/> <a id="pdf28"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_I_Chap_VIII"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. VIII. How, when the persecution
          ceased, the Church in Britain enjoyed peace till the time of the
          Arian heresy.</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">When the storm
          of persecution ceased, the faithful Christians, who, during the
          time of danger, had hidden themselves in woods and deserts and
          secret caves, came forth and rebuilt the churches which had been
          levelled to the ground; founded, erected, and finished the
          cathedrals raised in honour of the holy martyrs, and, as if
          displaying their conquering standards in all places, celebrated
          festivals and performed their sacred rites with pure hearts and
          lips. This peace continued in the Christian churches of Britain
          until the time of the Arian madness, which, having corrupted the
          whole world, infected this island also, so far removed from the
          rest of the world, with the poison of its error; and when once a
          way was opened across the sea for that plague, straightway all the
          taint of every heresy fell upon the island, ever desirous to hear
          some new thing, and never holding firm to any sure belief.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At this time
          Constantius, who, whilst Diocletian was alive, governed Gaul and
          Spain, a man of great clemency and urbanity, died in Britain. This
          man left his son Constantine,<a href="#note_59" id="noteref_59" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">59</span></span></a> born
          of Helena, his concubine, emperor of the Gauls. Eutropius writes
          that Constantine, being created emperor in Britain, succeeded his
          father in the sovereignty. In his time the Arian heresy broke out,
          and although it was exposed and condemned in the Council of
          Nicaea,<a href="#note_60" id="noteref_60" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">60</span></span></a>
          nevertheless, the deadly poison of its evil spread, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page020">[pg 020]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg020"/> as has been said, to the Churches in
          the islands, as well as to those of the rest of the world.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc29"/> <a id="pdf30"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_I_Chap_IX"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. IX. How during the reign of
          Gratian, Maximus, being created Emperor in Britain, returned into
          Gaul with a mighty army.</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year of
          our Lord 377,<a href="#note_61" id="noteref_61" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">61</span></span></a>
          Gratian, the fortieth from Augustus, held the empire for six years
          after the death of Valens; though he had long before reigned with
          his uncle Valens, and his brother Valentinian. Finding the
          condition of the commonwealth much impaired, and almost gone to
          ruin, and impelled by the necessity of restoring it, he invested
          the Spaniard, Theodosius, with the purple at Sirmium, and made him
          emperor of Thrace and the Eastern provinces. At that time,
          Maximus,<a href="#note_62" id="noteref_62" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">62</span></span></a> a man
          of energy and probity, and worthy of the title of Augustus, if he
          had not broken his oath of allegiance, was made emperor by the army
          somewhat against his will, passed over into Gaul, and there by
          treachery slew the Emperor Gratian, who in consternation at his
          sudden invasion, was attempting to escape into Italy. His brother,
          the Emperor Valentinian, expelled from Italy, fled into the East,
          where he was entertained by Theodosius with fatherly affection, and
          soon restored to the empire, for Maximus the tyrant, being shut up
          in Aquileia, was there taken by them and put to death.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc31"/> <a id="pdf32"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_I_Chap_X"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. X. How, in the reign of
          Arcadius, Pelagius, a Briton, insolently impugned the Grace of
          God.</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year of
          our Lord 394,<a href="#note_63" id="noteref_63" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">63</span></span></a>
          Arcadius, the son of Theodosius, the forty-third from Augustus,
          succeeding to <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page021">[pg
          021]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg021"/>
          the empire, with his brother Honorius, held it thirteen years. In
          his time, Pelagius,<a href="#note_64" id="noteref_64" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">64</span></span></a> a
          Briton, spread far and near the infection of his perfidious
          doctrine, denying the assistance of the Divine grace, being
          seconded therein by his associate Julianus of Campania,<a href="#note_65" id="noteref_65" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">65</span></span></a> who
          was impelled by an uncontrolled desire to recover his bishopric, of
          which he had been deprived. St. Augustine, and the other orthodox
          fathers, quoted many thousand catholic authorities against them,
          but failed to amend their folly; nay, more, their madness being
          rebuked was rather increased by contradiction than suffered by them
          to be purified through adherence to the truth; which Prosper, the
          rhetorician,<a href="#note_66" id="noteref_66" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">66</span></span></a> has
          beautifully expressed thus in heroic<a href="#note_67" id="noteref_67" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">67</span></span></a>
          verse:—</p>
<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
<span style="font-size: 90%">They tell that one, erewhile consumed
          with gnawing spite, snake-like attacked Augustine in his writings.
          Who urged the wretched viper to raise from the ground his head,
          howsoever hidden in dens of darkness? Either the sea-girt Britons
          reared him with the fruit of their soil, or fed on Campanian
          pastures his heart swells with pride.</span>
</div>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page022">[pg 022]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg022"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc33"/> <a id="pdf34"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_I_Chap_XI"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XI. How during the reign of
          Honorius, Gratian and Constantine were created tyrants in Britain;
          and soon after the former was slain in Britain, and the latter in
          Gaul.</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year of
          our Lord 407,<a href="#note_68" id="noteref_68" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">68</span></span></a>
          Honorius, the younger son of Theodosius, and the forty-fourth from
          Augustus, being emperor, two years before the invasion of Rome by
          Alaric, king of the Goths, when the nations of the Alani, Suevi,
          Vandals, and many others with them, having defeated the Franks and
          passed the Rhine, ravaged all Gaul, Gratianus, a citizen of the
          country, was set up as tyrant in Britain and killed. In his place,
          Constantine, one of the meanest soldiers, only for the hope
          afforded by his name, and without any worth to recommend him, was
          chosen emperor. As soon as he had taken upon him the command, he
          crossed over into Gaul, where being often imposed upon by the
          barbarians with untrustworthy treaties, he did more harm than good
          to the Commonwealth.<a href="#note_69" id="noteref_69" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">69</span></span></a>
          Whereupon Count Constantius,<a href="#note_70" id="noteref_70" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">70</span></span></a> by the
          command of Honorius, marching into Gaul with an army, besieged him
          in the city of Arles, took him prisoner, and put him to death. His
          son Constans, a monk, whom he had created Caesar, was also put to
          death by his own follower Count Gerontius,<a href="#note_71" id="noteref_71" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">71</span></span></a> at
          Vienne.</p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page023">[pg
          023]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg023"/>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Rome was taken
          by the Goths, in the year from its foundation, 1164.<a href="#note_72" id="noteref_72" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">72</span></span></a> Then
          the Romans ceased to rule in Britain, almost 470 years after Caius
          Julius Caesar came to the island. They dwelt within the rampart,
          which, as we have mentioned, Severus made across the island, on the
          south side of it, as the cities, watch-towers,<a href="#note_73" id="noteref_73" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">73</span></span></a>
          bridges, and paved roads there made testify to this day; but they
          had a right of dominion over the farther parts of Britain, as also
          over the islands that are beyond Britain.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc35"/> <a id="pdf36"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_I_Chap_XII"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XII. How the Britons, being
          ravaged by the Scots and Picts, sought succour from the Romans, who
          coming a second time, built a wall across the island; but when this
          was broken down at once by the aforesaid enemies, they were reduced
          to greater distress than before.</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">From that time,
          the British part of Britain, destitute of armed soldiers, of all
          military stores, and of the whole flower of its active youth, who
          had been led away by the rashness of the tyrants never to return,
          was wholly exposed to rapine, the people being altogether ignorant
          of the use of weapons. Whereupon they suffered many years from the
          sudden invasions of two very savage nations from beyond the sea,
          the Scots from the west, and the Picts from the north. We call
          these nations from beyond the sea, not on account of their being
          seated out of Britain, but because they were separated from that
          part of it which was possessed by the Britons, two broad and long
          inlets of the sea lying between them, one of which runs into the
          interior of Britain, from the Eastern Sea, and the other from the
          Western, though they do not reach so far as to touch one another.
          The eastern has in the midst of it the city Giudi.<a href="#note_74" id="noteref_74" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">74</span></span></a> On the
          Western Sea, that is, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page024">[pg
          024]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg024"/>
          on its right shore, stands the city of Alcluith,<a href="#note_75" id="noteref_75" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">75</span></span></a> which
          in their language signifies the Rock Cluith, for it is close by the
          river of that name.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">On account of
          the attacks of these nations, the Britons sent messengers to Rome
          with letters piteously praying for succour, and promising perpetual
          subjection, provided that the impending enemy should be driven
          away. An armed legion was immediately sent them, which, arriving in
          the island, and engaging the enemy, slew a great multitude of them,
          drove the rest out of the territories of their allies, and having
          in the meanwhile delivered them from their worst distress, advised
          them to build a wall between the two seas across the island, that
          it might secure them by keeping off the enemy. So they returned
          home with great triumph. But the islanders building the wall which
          they had been told to raise, not of stone, since they had no
          workmen capable of such a work, but of sods, made it of no use.
          Nevertheless, they carried it for many miles between the two bays
          or inlets of the sea of which we have spoken;<a href="#note_76" id="noteref_76" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">76</span></span></a> to the
          end that where the protection of the water was wanting, they might
          use the rampart to defend their borders from the irruptions of the
          enemies. Of the work there erected, that is, of a rampart of great
          breadth and height, there are evident remains to be seen at this
          day. It begins at about two miles' distance from the monastery of
          Aebbercurnig,<a href="#note_77" id="noteref_77" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">77</span></span></a> west
          of it, at a place called in the Pictish language Peanfahel,<a href="#note_78" id="noteref_78" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">78</span></span></a> but in
          the English tongue, Penneltun, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page025">[pg 025]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg025"/> and running westward, ends near the city of
          Alcluith.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But the former
          enemies, when they perceived that the Roman soldiers were gone,
          immediately coming by sea, broke into the borders, trampled and
          overran all places, and like men mowing ripe corn, bore down all
          before them. Hereupon messengers were again sent to Rome miserably
          imploring aid, lest their wretched country should be utterly
          blotted out, and the name of a Roman province, so long renowned
          among them, overthrown by the cruelties of foreign races, might
          become utterly contemptible. A legion was accordingly sent again,
          and, arriving unexpectedly in autumn, made great slaughter of the
          enemy, obliging all those that could escape, to flee beyond the
          sea; whereas before, they were wont yearly to carry off their booty
          without any opposition. Then the Romans declared to the Britons,
          that they could not for the future undertake such troublesome
          expeditions for their sake, and advised them rather to take up arms
          and make an effort to engage their enemies, who could not prove too
          powerful for them, unless they themselves were enervated by
          cowardice. Moreover, thinking that it might be some help to the
          allies, whom they were forced to abandon, they constructed a strong
          stone wall from sea to sea, in a straight line between the towns
          that had been there built for fear of the enemy, where Severus also
          had formerly built a rampart.<a href="#note_79" id="noteref_79" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">79</span></span></a> This
          famous wall, which is still to be seen, was raised at public and
          private expense, the Britons also lending their assistance. It is
          eight feet in breadth, and twelve in height, in a straight line
          from east to west, as is still evident to <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page026">[pg 026]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg026"/> beholders. This being presently finished,
          they gave the dispirited people good advice, and showed them how to
          furnish themselves with arms. Besides, they built towers to command
          a view of the sea, at intervals, on the southern coast, where their
          ships lay, because there also the invasions of the barbarians were
          apprehended, and so took leave of their allies, never to return
          again.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">After their
          departure to their own country, the Scots and Picts, understanding
          that they had refused to return, at once came back, and growing
          more confident than they had been before, occupied all the northern
          and farthest part of the island, driving out the natives, as far as
          the wall. Hereupon a timorous guard was placed upon the
          fortification, where, dazed with fear, they became ever more
          dispirited day by day. On the other side, the enemy constantly
          attacked them with barbed weapons, by which the cowardly defenders
          were dragged in piteous fashion from the wall, and dashed against
          the ground. At last, the Britons, forsaking their cities and wall,
          took to flight and were scattered. The enemy pursued, and forthwith
          followed a massacre more grievous than ever before; for the
          wretched natives were torn in pieces by their enemies, as lambs are
          torn by wild beasts. Thus, being expelled from their dwellings and
          lands, they saved themselves from the immediate danger of
          starvation by robbing and plundering one another, adding to the
          calamities inflicted by the enemy their own domestic broils, till
          the whole country was left destitute of food except such as could
          be procured in the chase.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc37"/> <a id="pdf38"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_I_Chap_XIII"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XIII. How in the reign of
          Theodosius the younger, in whose time Palladius was sent to the
          Scots that believed in Christ, the Britons begging assistance of
          Ætius, the consul, could not obtain it. [446</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year of
          our Lord 423, Theodosius, the younger, the forty-fifth from
          Augustus, succeeded Honorius and governed the Roman empire
          twenty-six years. In the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page027">[pg
          027]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg027"/>
          eighth year of his reign,<a href="#note_80" id="noteref_80" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">80</span></span></a>
          Palladius was sent by Celestinus, the Roman pontiff, to the Scots
          that believed in Christ, to be their first bishop. In the
          twenty-third year of his reign, Aetius,<a href="#note_81" id="noteref_81" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">81</span></span></a> a man
          of note and a patrician, discharged his third consulship with
          Symmachus for his colleague. To him the wretched remnant of the
          Britons sent a letter, which began thus:—<span class="tei tei-q">“To Aetius, thrice Consul, the groans of the
          Britons.”</span> And in the sequel of the letter they thus unfolded
          their woes:—<span class="tei tei-q">“The barbarians drive us to the
          sea; the sea drives us back to the barbarians: between them we are
          exposed to two sorts of death; we are either slaughtered or
          drowned.”</span> Yet, for all this, they could not obtain any help
          from him, as he was then engaged in most serious wars with Bledla
          and Attila, kings of the Huns. And though the year before
          this<a href="#note_82" id="noteref_82" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">82</span></span></a> Bledla
          had been murdered by the treachery of his own brother Attila, yet
          Attila himself remained so intolerable an enemy to the Republic,
          that he ravaged almost all Europe, attacking and destroying cities
          and castles. At the same time there was a famine at Constantinople,
          and soon after a plague followed; moreover, a great part of the
          wall of that city, with fifty-seven towers, fell to the ground.
          Many cities also went to ruin, and the famine and pestilential
          state of the air destroyed thousands of men and cattle.</p>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page028">[pg 028]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg028"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc39"/> <a id="pdf40"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XIV. How the Britons, compelled
          by the great famine, drove the barbarians out of their territories;
          and soon after there ensued, along with abundance of corn, decay of
          morals, pestilence, and the downfall of the nation.</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the meantime,
          the aforesaid famine distressing the Britons more and more, and
          leaving to posterity a lasting memory of its mischievous effects,
          obliged many of them to submit themselves to the depredators;
          though others still held out, putting their trust in God, when
          human help failed. These continually made raids from the mountains,
          caves, and woods, and, at length, began to inflict severe losses on
          their enemies, who had been for so many years plundering the
          country. The bold Irish robbers thereupon returned home, intending
          to come again before long. The Picts then settled down in the
          farthest part of the island and afterwards remained there, but they
          did not fail to plunder and harass the Britons from time to
          time.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Now, when the
          ravages of the enemy at length abated, the island began to abound
          with such plenty of grain as had never been known in any age
          before; along with plenty, evil living increased, and this was
          immediately attended by the taint of all manner of crime; in
          particular, cruelty, hatred of truth, and love of falsehood;
          insomuch, that if any one among them happened to be milder than the
          rest, and more inclined to truth, all the rest abhorred and
          persecuted him unrestrainedly, as if he had been the enemy of
          Britain. Nor were the laity only guilty of these things, but even
          our Lord's own flock, with its shepherds, casting off the easy yoke
          of Christ, gave themselves up to drunkenness, enmity, quarrels,
          strife, envy, and other such sins. In the meantime, on a sudden, a
          grievous plague fell upon that corrupt generation, which soon
          destroyed such numbers of them, that the living scarcely availed to
          bury the dead: yet, those that survived, could not be recalled from
          the spiritual death, which they had incurred through their
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page029">[pg 029]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg029"/> sins, either by the
          death of their friends, or the fear of death. Whereupon, not long
          after, a more severe vengeance for their fearful crimes fell upon
          the sinful nation. They held a council to determine what was to be
          done, and where they should seek help to prevent or repel the cruel
          and frequent incursions of the northern nations; and in concert
          with their King Vortigern,<a href="#note_83" id="noteref_83" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">83</span></span></a> it was
          unanimously decided to call the Saxons to their aid from beyond the
          sea, which, as the event plainly showed, was brought about by the
          Lord's will, that evil might fall upon them for their wicked
          deeds.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc41"/> <a id="pdf42"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_I_Chap_XV"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XV. How the Angles, being
          invited into Britain, at first drove off the enemy; but not long
          after, making a league with them, turned their weapons against
          their allies.</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year of
          our Lord 449,<a href="#note_84" id="noteref_84" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">84</span></span></a>
          Marcian, the forty-sixth from Augustus, being made emperor with
          Valentinian, ruled the empire seven years. Then the nation of the
          Angles, or Saxons,<a href="#note_85" id="noteref_85" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">85</span></span></a> being
          invited by the aforesaid king,<a href="#note_86" id="noteref_86" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">86</span></span></a>
          arrived in Britain with three ships of war and had a place in which
          to settle assigned to them by the same king, in the eastern part of
          the island, on the pretext of fighting in defence of their country,
          whilst their real intentions were to conquer it. Accordingly they
          engaged with the enemy, who were come from the north to give
          battle, and the Saxons obtained the victory. When the news of their
          success and of the fertility of the country, and the cowardice of
          the Britons, reached their own home, a <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page030">[pg 030]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg030"/> more considerable fleet was quickly sent
          over, bringing a greater number of men, and these, being added to
          the former army, made up an invincible force. The newcomers
          received of the Britons a place to inhabit among them, upon
          condition that they should wage war against their enemies for the
          peace and security of the country, whilst the Britons agreed to
          furnish them with pay. Those who came over were of the three most
          powerful nations of Germany—Saxons, Angles, and Jutes. From the
          Jutes are descended the people of Kent, and of the Isle of Wight,
          including those in the province of the West-Saxons who are to this
          day called Jutes, seated opposite to the Isle of Wight. From the
          Saxons, that is, the country which is now called Old Saxony, came
          the East-Saxons, the South-Saxons, and the West-Saxons. From the
          Angles, that is, the country which is called Angulus,<a href="#note_87" id="noteref_87" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">87</span></span></a> and
          which is said, from that time, to have remained desert to this day,
          between the provinces of the Jutes and the Saxons, are descended
          the East-Angles, the Midland-Angles, the Mercians, all the race of
          the Northumbrians, that is, of those nations that dwell on the
          north side of the river Humber, and the other nations of the
          Angles. The first commanders are said to have been the two brothers
          Hengist and Horsa. Of these Horsa was afterwards slain in battle by
          the Britons,<a href="#note_88" id="noteref_88" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">88</span></span></a> and a
          monument, bearing his name, is still in existence in the eastern
          parts of Kent. They were the sons of Victgilsus, whose father was
          Vitta, son of Vecta, son of Woden; from whose stock the royal race
          of many provinces trace their descent. In a short time, swarms of
          the aforesaid nations came over into the island, and the foreigners
          began to increase so much, that they became a source of terror to
          the natives themselves <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page031">[pg
          031]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg031"/>
          who had invited them. Then, having on a sudden entered into league
          with the Picts, whom they had by this time repelled by force of
          arms, they began to turn their weapons against their allies. At
          first, they obliged them to furnish a greater quantity of
          provisions; and, seeking an occasion of quarrel, protested, that
          unless more plentiful supplies were brought them, they would break
          the league, and ravage all the island; nor were they backward in
          putting their threats into execution. In short, the fire kindled by
          the hands of the pagans, proved God's just vengeance for the crimes
          of the people; not unlike that which, being of old lighted by the
          Chaldeans, consumed the walls and all the buildings of Jerusalem.
          For here, too, through the agency of the pitiless conqueror, yet by
          the disposal of the just Judge, it ravaged all the neighbouring
          cities and country, spread the conflagration from the eastern to
          the western sea, without any opposition, and overran the whole face
          of the doomed island. Public as well as private buildings were
          overturned; the priests were everywhere slain before the altars; no
          respect was shown for office, the prelates with the people were
          destroyed with fire and sword; nor were there any left to bury
          those who had been thus cruelly slaughtered. Some of the miserable
          remnant, being taken in the mountains, were butchered in heaps.
          Others, spent with hunger, came forth and submitted themselves to
          the enemy, to undergo for the sake of food perpetual servitude, if
          they were not killed upon the spot. Some, with sorrowful hearts,
          fled beyond the seas. Others, remaining in their own country, led a
          miserable life of terror and anxiety of mind among the mountains,
          woods and crags.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc43"/> <a id="pdf44"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_I_Chap_XVI"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XVI. How the Britons obtained
          their first victory over the Angles, under the command of
          Ambrosius, a Roman.</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">When the army of
          the enemy, having destroyed and dispersed the natives, had returned
          home to their own <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page032">[pg
          032]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg032"/>
          settlements,<a href="#note_89" id="noteref_89" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">89</span></span></a> the
          Britons began by degrees to take heart, and gather strength,
          sallying out of the lurking places where they had concealed
          themselves, and with one accord imploring the Divine help, that
          they might not utterly be destroyed. They had at that time for
          their leader, Ambrosius Aurelianus,<a href="#note_90" id="noteref_90" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">90</span></span></a> a man
          of worth, who alone, by chance, of the Roman nation had survived
          the storm, in which his parents, who were of the royal race, had
          perished. Under him the Britons revived, and offering battle to the
          victors, by the help of God, gained the victory. From that day,
          sometimes the natives, and sometimes their enemies, prevailed, till
          the year of the siege of Badon-hill,<a href="#note_91" id="noteref_91" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">91</span></span></a> when
          they made no small slaughter of those enemies, about forty-four
          years after their arrival in England. But of this hereafter.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc45"/> <a id="pdf46"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_I_Chap_XVII"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XVII. How Germanus the Bishop,
          sailing into Britain with Lupus, first quelled the tempest of the
          sea, and afterwards that of the Pelagians, by Divine power.
          [429</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Some few years
          before their arrival, the Pelagian heresy, brought over by
          Agricola, the son of Severianus,<a href="#note_92" id="noteref_92" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">92</span></span></a> a
          Pelagian bishop, had corrupted with its foul taint the faith of the
          Britons. But whereas they absolutely refused to embrace that
          perverse doctrine, and blaspheme the grace of Christ, yet were not
          able of themselves to confute the subtilty of the unholy belief by
          force of argument, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page033">[pg
          033]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg033"/>
          they bethought them of wholesome counsels and determined to crave
          aid of the Gallican prelates in that spiritual warfare. Hereupon,
          these, having assembled a great synod, consulted together to
          determine what persons should be sent thither to sustain the faith,
          and by unanimous consent, choice was made of the apostolic
          prelates, Germanus, Bishop of Auxerre, and Lupus of Troyes,<a href="#note_93" id="noteref_93" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">93</span></span></a> to go
          into Britain to confirm the people's faith in the grace of God.
          With ready zeal they complied with the request and commands of the
          Holy Church, and put to sea. The ship sped safely with favouring
          winds till they were halfway between the coast of Gaul and Britain.
          There on a sudden they were obstructed by the malevolence of
          demons, who were jealous that men of such eminence and piety should
          be sent to bring back the people to salvation. They raised storms,
          and darkened the sky with clouds. The sails could not support the
          fury of the winds, the sailors' skill was forced to give way, the
          ship was sustained by prayer, not by strength, and as it happened,
          their spiritual leader and bishop, being spent with weariness, had
          fallen asleep. Then, as if because resistance flagged, the tempest
          gathered strength, and the ship, overwhelmed by the waves, was
          ready to sink. Then the blessed Lupus and all the rest, greatly
          troubled, awakened their elder, that he might oppose the raging
          elements. He, showing himself the more resolute in proportion to
          the greatness of the danger, called upon Christ, and having, in the
          name of the Holy Trinity, taken and sprinkled a little water,
          quelled the raging waves, admonished his companion, encouraged all,
          and all with one consent uplifted their <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page034">[pg 034]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg034"/> voices in prayer. Divine help was granted,
          the enemies were put to flight, a cloudless calm ensued, the winds
          veering about set themselves again to forward their voyage, the sea
          was soon traversed, and they reached the quiet of the wished-for
          shore. A multitude flocking thither from all parts, received the
          bishops, whose coming had been foretold by the predictions even of
          their adversaries. For the evil spirits declared their fear, and
          when the bishops expelled them from the bodies of the possessed,
          they made known the nature of the tempest, and the dangers they had
          occasioned, and confessed that they had been overcome by the merits
          and authority of these men.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the meantime
          the bishops speedily filled the island of Britain with the fame of
          their preaching and miracles; and the Word of God was by them daily
          preached, not only in the churches, but even in the streets and
          fields, so that the faithful and Catholic were everywhere
          confirmed, and those who had been perverted accepted the way of
          amendment. Like the Apostles, they acquired honour and authority
          through a good conscience, learning through the study of letters,
          and the power of working miracles through their merits. Thus the
          whole country readily came over to their way of thinking; the
          authors of the erroneous belief kept themselves in hiding, and,
          like evil spirits, grieved for the loss of the people that were
          rescued from them. At length, after long deliberation, they had the
          boldness to enter the lists.<a href="#note_94" id="noteref_94" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">94</span></span></a> They
          came forward in all the splendour of their wealth, with gorgeous
          apparel, and supported by a numerous following; choosing rather to
          hazard the contest, than to undergo among the people whom they had
          led astray, the reproach of having been silenced, lest they should
          seem by saying nothing to condemn themselves. An immense multitude
          had been attracted thither with their wives and children. The
          people were present as spectators and judges; the two parties stood
          there in very different case; on the one side was Divine faith, on
          the other <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page035">[pg
          035]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg035"/>
          human presumption; on the one side piety, on the other pride; on
          the one side Pelagius, the founder of their faith, on the other
          Christ. The blessed bishops permitted their adversaries to speak
          first, and their empty speech long took up the time and filled the
          ears with meaningless words. Then the venerable prelates poured
          forth the torrent of their eloquence and showered upon them the
          words of Apostles and Evangelists, mingling the Scriptures with
          their own discourse and supporting their strongest assertions by
          the testimony of the written Word. Vainglory was vanquished and
          unbelief refuted; and the heretics, at every argument put before
          them, not being able to reply, confessed their errors. The people,
          giving judgement, could scarce refrain from violence, and signified
          their verdict by their acclamations.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc47"/> <a id="pdf48"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_I_Chap_XVIII"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XVIII. How the some holy man
          gave sight to the blind daughter of a tribune, and then coming to
          St. Alban, there received of his relics, and left other relics of
          the blessed Apostles and other martyrs. [429</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">After this, a
          certain man, who held the office of tribune, came forward with his
          wife, and brought his blind daughter, a child of ten years of age,
          to be healed of the bishops. They ordered her to be brought to
          their adversaries, who, being rebuked by their own conscience,
          joined their entreaties to those of the child's parents, and
          besought the bishops that she might be healed. They, therefore,
          perceiving their adversaries to yield, poured forth a short prayer,
          and then Germanus, full of the Holy Ghost, invoking the Trinity, at
          once drew from his side a casket which hung about his neck,
          containing relics of the saints, and, taking it in his hands,
          applied it in the sight of all to the girl's eyes, which were
          immediately delivered from darkness and filled with the light of
          truth. The parents rejoiced, and the people were filled with awe at
          the miracle; and after that day, the heretical beliefs were so
          fully obliterated from the minds <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page036">[pg 036]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg036"/> of all, that they thirsted for and sought
          after the doctrine of the bishops.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">This damnable
          heresy being thus suppressed, and the authors thereof confuted, and
          all the people settled in the purity of the faith, the bishops went
          to the tomb of the martyr, the blessed Alban, to give thanks to God
          through him. There Germanus, having with him relics of all the
          Apostles, and of divers martyrs, after offering up his prayers,
          commanded the tomb to be opened, that he might lay therein the
          precious gifts; judging it fitting, that the limbs of saints
          brought together from divers countries, as their equal merits had
          procured them admission into heaven, should find shelter in one
          tomb. These being honourably bestowed, and laid together, he took
          up a handful of dust from the place where the blessed martyr's
          blood had been shed, to carry away with him. In this dust the blood
          had been preserved, showing that the slaughter of the martyrs was
          red, though the persecutor was pale in death.<a href="#note_95" id="noteref_95" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">95</span></span></a> In
          consequence of these things, an innumerable multitude of people was
          that day converted to the Lord.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc49"/> <a id="pdf50"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XIX. How the same holy man,
          being detained there by sickness, by his prayers quenched a fire
          that had broken out among the houses, and was himself cured of his
          infirmity by a vision. [429</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">As they were
          returning thence, the treacherous enemy, having, as it chanced,
          prepared a snare, caused Germanus to bruise his foot by a fall, not
          knowing that, as it was with the blessed Job, his merits would be
          but increased by bodily affliction. Whilst he was thus detained
          some time in the same place by his infirmity, a fire broke out in a
          cottage neighbouring to that in which he was; and having burned
          down the other houses which were thatched <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page037">[pg 037]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg037"/> with reed, fanned by the wind, was carried on
          to the dwelling in which he lay. The people all flocked to the
          prelate, entreating that they might lift him in their arms, and
          save him from the impending danger. But he rebuked them, and in the
          assurance of his faith, would not suffer himself to be removed. The
          whole multitude, in terror and despair, ran to oppose the
          conflagration; but, for the greater manifestation of the Divine
          power, whatsoever the crowd endeavoured to save, was destroyed; and
          what the sick and helpless man defended, the flame avoided and
          passed by, though the house that sheltered the holy man lay open to
          it,<a href="#note_96" id="noteref_96" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">96</span></span></a> and
          while the fire raged on every side, the place in which he lay
          appeared untouched, amid the general conflagration. The multitude
          rejoiced at the miracle, and was gladly vanquished by the power of
          God. A great crowd of people watched day and night before the
          humble cottage; some to have their souls healed, and some their
          bodies. All that Christ wrought in the person of his servant, all
          the wonders the sick man performed cannot be told. Moreover, he
          would suffer no medicines to be applied to his infirmity; but one
          night he saw one clad in garments as white as snow, standing by
          him, who reaching out his hand, seemed to raise him up, and ordered
          him to stand firm upon his feet; from which time his pain ceased,
          and he was so perfectly restored, that when the day came, with good
          courage he set forth upon his journey.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc51"/> <a id="pdf52"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XX. How the same Bishops
          brought help from Heaven to the Britons in a battle, and then
          returned home. [430</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the meantime,
          the Saxons and Picts, with their united forces, made war upon the
          Britons, who in these straits were compelled to take up arms. In
          their terror thinking themselves unequal to their enemies, they
          implored the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page038">[pg
          038]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg038"/>
          assistance of the holy bishops; who, hastening to them as they had
          promised, inspired so much confidence into these fearful people,
          that one would have thought they had been joined by a mighty army.
          Thus, by these apostolic leaders, Christ Himself commanded in their
          camp. The holy days of Lent were also at hand, and were rendered
          more sacred by the presence of the bishops, insomuch that the
          people being instructed by daily sermons, came together eagerly to
          receive the grace of baptism. For a great multitude of the army
          desired admission to the saving waters, and a wattled church was
          constructed for the Feast of the Resurrection of our Lord, and so
          fitted up for the army in the field as if it were in a city. Still
          wet with the baptismal water the troops set forth; the faith of the
          people was fired; and where arms had been deemed of no avail, they
          looked to the help of God. News reached the enemy of the manner and
          method of their purification,<a href="#note_97" id="noteref_97" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">97</span></span></a> who,
          assured of success, as if they had to deal with an unarmed host,
          hastened forward with renewed eagerness. But their approach was
          made known by scouts. When, after the celebration of Easter, the
          greater part of the army, fresh from the font, began to take up
          arms and prepare for war, Germanus offered to be their leader. He
          picked out the most active, explored the country round about, and
          observed, in the way by which the enemy was expected, a valley
          encompassed by hills<a href="#note_98" id="noteref_98" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">98</span></span></a> of
          moderate height. In that place he drew up his untried troops,
          himself acting as their general. And now a formidable host of foes
          drew near, visible, as they approached, to his men lying in ambush.
          Then, on a sudden, Germanus, bearing the standard, exhorted his
          men, and bade them all in a loud voice repeat <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page039">[pg 039]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg039"/> his words. As the enemy advanced in all
          security, thinking to take them by surprise, the bishops three
          times cried, <span class="tei tei-q">“Hallelujah.”</span> A
          universal shout of the same word followed, and the echoes from the
          surrounding hills gave back the cry on all sides, the enemy was
          panic-stricken, fearing, not only the neighbouring rocks, but even
          the very frame of heaven above them; and such was their terror,
          that their feet were not swift enough to save them. They fled in
          disorder, casting away their arms, and well satisfied if, even with
          unprotected bodies, they could escape the danger; many of them,
          flying headlong in their fear, were engulfed by the river which
          they had crossed. The Britons, without a blow, inactive spectators
          of the victory they had gained, beheld their vengeance complete.
          The scattered spoils were gathered up, and the devout soldiers
          rejoiced in the success which Heaven had granted them. The prelates
          thus triumphed over the enemy without bloodshed, and gained a
          victory by faith, without the aid of human force. Thus, having
          settled the affairs of the island, and restored tranquillity by the
          defeat of the invisible foes, as well as of enemies in the flesh,
          they prepared to return home. Their own merits, and the
          intercession of the blessed martyr Alban, obtained for them a calm
          passage, and the happy vessel restored them in peace to the desires
          of their people.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc53"/> <a id="pdf54"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XXI. How, when the Pelagian
          heresy began to spring up afresh, Germanus, returning to Britain
          with Severus, first restored bodily strength to a lame youth, then
          spiritual health to the people of God, having condemned or
          converted the Heretics. [447</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Not long after,
          news was brought from the same island, that certain persons were
          again attempting to teach and spread abroad the Pelagian heresy,
          and again the holy Germanus was entreated by all the priests, that
          he would defend the cause of God, which he had before maintained.
          He speedily complied with their request; and taking <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page040">[pg 040]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg040"/> with him Severus,<a href="#note_99" id="noteref_99" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">99</span></span></a> a man
          of singular sanctity, who was disciple to the blessed father,
          Lupus, bishop of Troyes, and at that time, having been ordained
          bishop of the Treveri, was preaching the Word of God to the tribes
          of Upper Germany, put to sea, and with favouring winds and calm
          waters sailed to Britain.<a href="#note_100" id="noteref_100" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">100</span></span></a></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the meantime,
          the evil spirits, speeding through the whole island, were
          constrained against their will to foretell that Germanus was
          coming, insomuch, that one Elafius, a chief of that region, without
          tidings from any visible messenger, hastened to meet the holy men,
          carrying with him his son, who in the very flower of his youth
          laboured under a grievous infirmity; for the sinews of the knee
          were wasted and shrunk, so that the withered limb was denied the
          power to walk. All the country followed this Elafius. The bishops
          arrived, and were met by the ignorant multitude, whom they blessed,
          and preached the Word of God to them. They found the people
          constant in the faith as they had left them; and learning that but
          few had gone astray, they sought out the authors of the evil and
          condemned them. Then suddenly Elafius cast himself at the feet of
          the bishops, presenting his son, whose distress was visible and
          needed no words to express it. All were grieved, but especially the
          bishops, who, filled with pity, invoked the mercy of God; and
          straightway the blessed Germanus, causing the youth to sit down,
          touched the bent and feeble knee and passed his healing hand over
          all the diseased part. At once health was restored by the power of
          his touch, the withered limb regained its vigour, the sinews
          resumed their task, and the youth was, in the presence of all the
          people, delivered whole to his father. The multitude was amazed at
          the miracle, and the Catholic faith was firmly established in the
          hearts of all; after which, they were, in a sermon, exhorted to
          amend their error. By the judgement of all, the exponents of the
          heresy, who had been <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page041">[pg
          041]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg041"/>
          banished from the island, were brought before the bishops, to be
          conveyed into the continent, that the country might be rid of them,
          and they corrected of their errors. So it came to pass that the
          faith in those parts continued long after pure and untainted. Thus
          when they had settled all things, the blessed prelates returned
          home as prosperously as they had come.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But Germanus,
          after this, went to Ravenna to intercede for the tranquillity of
          the Armoricans,<a href="#note_101" id="noteref_101" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">101</span></span></a>
          where, after being very honourably received by Valentinian and his
          mother, Placidia, he departed hence to Christ; his body was
          conveyed to his own city with a splendid retinue, and mighty works
          attended his passage to the grave. Not long after, Valentinian was
          murdered by the followers of Aetius, the patrician, whom he had put
          to death, in the sixth<a href="#note_102" id="noteref_102" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">102</span></span></a> year
          of the reign of Marcian, and with him ended the empire of the
          West.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc55"/> <a id="pdf56"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XXII. How the Britons, being
          for a time at rest from foreign invasions, wore themselves out by
          civil wars, and at the same time gave themselves up to more heinous
          crimes.</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the meantime,
          in Britain, there was some respite from foreign, but not from civil
          war. The cities destroyed by the enemy and abandoned remained in
          ruins; and the natives, who had escaped the enemy, now fought
          against each other. Nevertheless, the kings, priests, private men,
          and the nobility, still remembering the late calamities and
          slaughters, in some measure kept within bounds; but when these
          died, and another generation succeeded, which knew nothing of those
          times, and was only acquainted with the existing peaceable state of
          things, all <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page042">[pg
          042]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg042"/>
          the bonds of truth and justice were so entirely broken, that there
          was not only no trace of them remaining, but only very few persons
          seemed to retain any memory of them at all. To other crimes beyond
          description, which their own historian, Gildas,<a href="#note_103" id="noteref_103" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">103</span></span></a>
          mournfully relates, they added this—that they never preached the
          faith to the Saxons, or English, who dwelt amongst them.
          Nevertheless, the goodness of God did not forsake his people, whom
          he foreknew, but sent to the aforesaid nation much more worthy
          heralds of the truth, to bring it to the faith.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc57"/> <a id="pdf58"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_I_Chap_XXIII"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XXIII. How the holy Pope
          Gregory sent Augustine, with other monks, to preach to the English
          nation, and encouraged them by a letter of exhortation, not to
          desist from their labour. [596</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year of
          our Lord 582, Maurice, the fifty-fourth from Augustus, ascended the
          throne, and reigned twenty-one years. In the tenth year of his
          reign, Gregory,<a href="#note_104" id="noteref_104" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">104</span></span></a> a man
          eminent in learning and the conduct of affairs, was promoted to the
          Apostolic see of Rome, and presided over it thirteen years, six
          months and ten days. He, being moved by Divine inspiration, in the
          fourteenth year of the same emperor, and about the one hundred and
          fiftieth after the coming of the English into Britain, sent the
          servant of God, Augustine,<a href="#note_105" id="noteref_105" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">105</span></span></a> and
          with him divers other monks, who feared the Lord, to preach the
          Word of God to the English nation. They having, in obedience
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page043">[pg 043]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg043"/> to the pope's
          commands, undertaken that work, when they had gone but a little way
          on their journey, were seized with craven terror, and began to
          think of returning home, rather than proceed to a barbarous,
          fierce, and unbelieving nation, to whose very language they were
          strangers; and by common consent they decided that this was the
          safer course. At once Augustine, who had been appointed to be
          consecrated bishop, if they should be received by the English, was
          sent back, that he might, by humble entreaty, obtain of the blessed
          Gregory, that they should not be compelled to undertake so
          dangerous, toilsome, and uncertain a journey. The pope, in reply,
          sent them a letter of exhortation, persuading them to set forth to
          the work of the Divine Word, and rely on the help of God. The
          purport of which letter was as follows:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Gregory, the servant of the servants of God,
          to the servants of our Lord.</span></span> Forasmuch as it had been
          better not to begin a good work, than to think of desisting from
          one which has been begun, it behoves you, my beloved sons, to
          fulfil with all diligence the good work, which, by the help of the
          Lord, you have undertaken. Let not, therefore, the toil of the
          journey, nor the tongues of evil-speaking men, discourage you; but
          with all earnestness and zeal perform, by God's guidance, that
          which you have set about; being assured, that great labour is
          followed by the greater glory of an eternal reward. When Augustine,
          your Superior, returns, whom we also constitute your abbot, humbly
          obey him in all things; knowing, that whatsoever you shall do by
          his direction, will, in all respects, be profitable to your souls.
          Almighty God protect you with His grace, and grant that I may, in
          the heavenly country, see the fruits of your labour, inasmuch as,
          though I cannot labour with you, I shall partake in the joy of the
          reward, because I am willing to labour. God keep you in safety, my
          most beloved sons. Given the 23rd of July, in the fourteenth year
          of the reign of our most religious lord, Mauritius Tiberius
          Augustus, the thirteenth year after the consulship of our lord
          aforesaid, and the fourteenth indiction.”</span><a href="#note_106" id="noteref_106" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">106</span></span></a></p>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page044">[pg 044]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg044"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc59"/> <a id="pdf60"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_I_Chap_XXIV"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XXIV. How he wrote to the
          bishop of Arles to entertain them. [596</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The same
          venerable pope also sent at the same time a letter to Aetherius,
          archbishop of Arles,<a href="#note_107" id="noteref_107" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">107</span></span></a>
          exhorting him to give favourable entertainment to Augustine on his
          way to Britain; which letter was in these words:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">To his most reverend and holy brother and
          fellow bishop Aetherius, Gregory, the servant of the servants of
          God.</span></span> Although religious men stand in need of no
          recommendation with priests who have the charity which is pleasing
          to God; yet because an opportunity of writing has occurred, we have
          thought fit to send this letter to you, Brother, to inform you,
          that with the help of God we have directed thither, for the good of
          souls, the bearer of these presents, Augustine, the servant of God,
          of whose zeal we are assured, with other servants of God, whom it
          is requisite that your Holiness readily assist with priestly zeal,
          affording him all the comfort in your power. And to the end that
          you may be the more ready in your help, we have enjoined him to
          inform you particularly of the occasion of his coming; knowing,
          that when you are acquainted with it, you will, as the matter
          requires, for the sake of God, dutifully dispose yourself to give
          him comfort. We also in all things recommend to your charity,
          Candidus,<a href="#note_108" id="noteref_108" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">108</span></span></a> the
          priest, our common son, whom we have transferred to the
          administration of a small patrimony in our Church. God keep you in
          safety, most reverend brother. Given the 23rd day of July, in the
          fourteenth year of the reign of our most religious lord, Mauritius
          Tiberius Augustus, the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page045">[pg
          045]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg045"/>
          thirteenth year after the consulship of our lord aforesaid, and the
          fourteenth indiction.”</span></p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc61"/> <a id="pdf62"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_I_Chap_XXV"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XXV. How Augustine, coming into
          Britain, first preached in the Isle of Thanet to the King of Kent,
          and having obtained licence from him, went into Kent, in order to
          preach therein. [597</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Augustine, thus
          strengthened by the encouragement of the blessed Father Gregory,
          returned to the work of the Word of God, with the servants of
          Christ who were with him, and arrived in Britain. The powerful
          Ethelbert was at that time king of Kent;<a href="#note_109" id="noteref_109" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">109</span></span></a> he
          had extended his dominions as far as the boundary formed by the
          great river Humber, by which the Southern Saxons are divided from
          the Northern. On the east of Kent is the large Isle of Thanet,
          containing, according to the English way of reckoning, 600
          families,<a href="#note_110" id="noteref_110" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">110</span></span></a>
          divided from the mainland by the river Wantsum,<a href="#note_111" id="noteref_111" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">111</span></span></a> which
          is about three furlongs in breadth, and which can be crossed only
          in two places; for at both ends it runs into the sea. On this
          island landed<a href="#note_112" id="noteref_112" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">112</span></span></a> the
          servant of the Lord, Augustine, and his companions, being, as is
          reported, nearly forty men. They had obtained, by order of the
          blessed Pope Gregory, interpreters of the nation of the
          Franks,<a href="#note_113" id="noteref_113" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">113</span></span></a> and
          sending to Ethelbert, signified that they <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page046">[pg 046]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg046"/> were come from Rome, and brought a joyful
          message, which most undoubtedly assured to those that hearkened to
          it everlasting joys in heaven, and a kingdom that would never end,
          with the living and true God. The king hearing this, gave orders
          that they should stay in the island where they had landed, and be
          furnished with necessaries, till he should consider what to do with
          them. For he had before heard of the Christian religion, having a
          Christian wife of the royal family of the Franks, called
          Bertha;<a href="#note_114" id="noteref_114" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">114</span></span></a> whom
          he had received from her parents, upon condition that she should be
          permitted to preserve inviolate the rites of her religion with the
          Bishop Liudhard,<a href="#note_115" id="noteref_115" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">115</span></span></a> who
          was sent with her to support her in the faith. Some days after, the
          king came into the island, and sitting in the open air, ordered
          Augustine and his companions to come and hold a conference with
          him. For he had taken precaution that they should not come to him
          in any house, lest, by so coming, according to an ancient
          superstition, if they practised any magical arts, they might impose
          upon him, and so get the better of him. But they came endued with
          Divine, not with magic power, bearing a silver cross for their
          banner, and the image of our Lord and Saviour painted on a board;
          and chanting litanies, they offered up their prayers to the Lord
          for the eternal salvation both of themselves and of those to whom
          and for whom they had come. When they had sat down, in obedience to
          the king's commands, and preached to him and his attendants there
          present <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page047">[pg
          047]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg047"/>
          the Word of life, the king answered thus: <span class="tei tei-q">“Your words and promises are fair, but because they are
          new to us, and of uncertain import, I cannot consent to them so far
          as to forsake that which I have so long observed with the whole
          English nation. But because you are come from far as strangers into
          my kingdom, and, as I conceive, are desirous to impart to us those
          things which you believe to be true, and most beneficial, we desire
          not to harm you, but will give you favourable entertainment, and
          take care to supply you with all things necessary to your
          sustenance; nor do we forbid you to preach and gain as many as you
          can to your religion.”</span> Accordingly he gave them an abode in
          the city of Canterbury,<a href="#note_116" id="noteref_116" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">116</span></span></a> which
          was the metropolis of all his dominions, and, as he had promised,
          besides supplying them with sustenance, did not refuse them liberty
          to preach. It is told that, as they drew near to the city, after
          their manner, with the holy cross, and the image of our sovereign
          Lord and King, Jesus Christ, they sang in concert this litany:
          <span class="tei tei-q">“We beseech thee, O Lord, for Thy great
          mercy, that Thy wrath and anger be turned away from this city, and
          from Thy holy house, for we have sinned. Hallelujah.”</span></p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc63"/> <a id="pdf64"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XXVI. How St. Augustine in Kent
          followed the doctrine and manner of life of the primitive Church,
          and settled his episcopal see in the royal city. [597</span>
<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">As soon as they
          entered the dwelling-place assigned to them, they began to imitate
          the Apostolic manner of life in the primitive Church; applying
          themselves to constant prayer, watchings, and fastings; preaching
          the Word of life to as many as they could; despising all worldly
          things, as in nowise concerning them; receiving only their
          necessary food from those they taught; living themselves in all
          respects conformably to what they taught, and being always ready to
          suffer any adversity, and even <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page048">[pg 048]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg048"/> to die for that truth which they preached. In
          brief, some believed and were baptized, admiring the simplicity of
          their blameless life, and the sweetness of their heavenly doctrine.
          There was on the east side of the city, a church dedicated of old
          to the honour of St. Martin,<a href="#note_117" id="noteref_117" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">117</span></span></a> built
          whilst the Romans were still in the island, wherein the queen, who,
          as has been said before, was a Christian, was wont to pray. In this
          they also first began to come together, to chant the Psalms, to
          pray, to celebrate Mass, to preach, and to baptize, till when the
          king had been converted to the faith, they obtained greater liberty
          to preach everywhere and build or repair churches.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">When he, among
          the rest, believed and was baptized, attracted by the pure life of
          these holy men and their gracious promises, the truth of which they
          established by many miracles, greater numbers began daily to flock
          together to hear the Word, and, forsaking their heathen rites, to
          have fellowship, through faith, in the unity of Christ's Holy
          Church. It is told that the king, while he rejoiced at their
          conversion and their faith, yet compelled none to embrace
          Christianity, but only showed more affection to the believers, as
          to his fellow citizens in the kingdom of Heaven. For he had learned
          from those who had instructed him and guided him to salvation, that
          the service of Christ ought to be voluntary, not by compulsion. Nor
          was it long before he gave his teachers a settled residence suited
          to their degree in his metropolis of Canterbury, with such
          possessions of divers sorts as were necessary for them.</p>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page049">[pg 049]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg049"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc65"/> <a id="pdf66"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_I_Chap_XXVII"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XXVII. How St. Augustine, being
          made a bishop, sent to acquaint Pope Gregory with what had been
          done in Britain, and asked and received replies, of which he stood
          in need. [597-601</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the meantime,
          Augustine, the man of God, went to Arles, and, according to the
          orders received from the holy Father Gregory, was ordained
          archbishop of the English nation,<a href="#note_118" id="noteref_118" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">118</span></span></a> by
          Aetherius,<a href="#note_119" id="noteref_119" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">119</span></span></a>
          archbishop of that city. Then returning into Britain, he sent
          Laurentius the the priest<a href="#note_120" id="noteref_120" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">120</span></span></a> and
          Peter the monk<a href="#note_121" id="noteref_121" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">121</span></span></a> to
          Rome, to acquaint Pope Gregory, that the English nation had
          received the faith of Christ, and that he was himself made their
          bishop. At the same time, he desired his solution of some doubts
          which seemed urgent to him. He soon received fitting answers to his
          questions, which we have also thought meet to insert in this our
          history:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The First Question of
          the blessed Augustine, Bishop of the Church of
          Canterbury.</span></span>—Concerning bishops, what should be their
          manner of conversation towards their clergy? or into how many
          portions the offerings of the faithful at the altar are to be
          divided? and how the bishop is to act in the Church?</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Gregory, Pope of the
          City of Rome, answers.</span></span>—Holy <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page050">[pg 050]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg050"/> Scripture, in which we doubt not you are well
          versed, testifies to this, and in particular the Epistles of the
          Blessed Paul to Timothy, wherein he endeavours to show him what
          should be his manner of conversation in the house of God; but it is
          the custom of the Apostolic see to prescribe these rules to bishops
          when they are ordained: that all emoluments which accrue, are to be
          divided into four portions;—one for the bishop and his household,
          for hospitality and entertainment of guests; another for the
          clergy; a third for the poor; and the fourth for the repair of
          churches. But in that you, my brother, having been instructed in
          monastic rules, must not live apart from your clergy in the Church
          of the English, which has been lately, by the will of God,
          converted to the faith, you must establish the manner of
          conversation of our fathers in the primitive Church, among whom,
          none said that aught of the things which they possessed was his
          own, but they had all things common.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But if there are
          any clerks not received into holy orders,<a href="#note_122" id="noteref_122" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">122</span></span></a> who
          cannot live continent, they are to take wives, and receive their
          stipends outside of the community; because we know that it is
          written concerning the same fathers of whom we have spoken that a
          distribution was made unto every man according as he had need. Care
          is also to be taken of their stipends, and provision to be made,
          and they are to be kept under ecclesiastical rule, that they may
          live orderly, and attend to singing of psalms, and, by the help of
          God, preserve their hearts and tongues and bodies from all that is
          unlawful. But as for those that live in common, there is no need to
          say anything of assigning portions, or dispensing hospitality and
          showing mercy; inasmuch as all that they have over is to be spent
          in pious and religious works, according to the teaching of Him who
          is the Lord and Master of all, <span class="tei tei-q">“Give alms
          of such things as ye have over, and behold all things are clean
          unto you.”</span><a href="#note_123" id="noteref_123" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">123</span></span></a></p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page051">[pg 051]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg051"/>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Augustine's Second
          Question.</span></span>—Whereas the faith is one and the same, are
          there different customs in different Churches? and is one custom of
          Masses observed in the holy Roman Church, and another in the Church
          of Gaul?<a href="#note_124" id="noteref_124" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">124</span></span></a></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Pope Gregory
          answers.</span></span>—You know, my brother, the custom of the
          Roman Church in which you remember that you were bred up. But my
          will is, that if you have found anything, either in the Roman, or
          the Gallican, or any other Church, which may be more acceptable to
          Almighty God, you should carefully make choice of the same, and
          sedulously teach the Church of the English, which as yet is new in
          the faith, whatsoever you can gather from the several Churches. For
          things are not to be loved for the sake of places, but places for
          the sake of good things. Choose, therefore, from every Church those
          things that are pious, religious, and right, and when you have, as
          it were, made them up into one bundle, let the minds of the English
          be accustomed thereto.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Augustine's Third
          Question.</span></span>—I beseech you, what punishment must be
          inflicted on one who steals anything from a church?</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Gregory
          answers.</span></span>—You may judge, my brother, by the condition
          of the thief, in what manner he is to be corrected. For there are
          some, who, having substance, commit theft; and there are others,
          who transgress in this matter through want. Wherefore it is
          requisite, that some be punished with fines, others with stripes;
          some with more severity, and some more mildly. And when the
          severity is greater, it is to proceed from charity, not from anger;
          because this is done for the sake of him who is corrected, that he
          may not be delivered up to the fires of Hell. For it behoves us to
          maintain discipline among the faithful, as good parents do with
          their children according to the flesh, whom they punish with
          stripes for their faults, and yet they design to make those whom
          they chastise their heirs, and preserve their possessions
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page052">[pg 052]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg052"/> for those whom they
          seem to visit in wrath. This charity is, therefore, to be kept in
          mind, and it dictates the measure of the punishment, so that the
          mind may do nothing beyond the rule prescribed by reason. You will
          add to this, how men are to restore those things which they have
          stolen from the church. But let not the Church take more than it
          has lost of its worldly possessions, or seek gain from
          vanities.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Augustine's Fourth
          Question.</span></span>—Whether two full brothers may marry two
          sisters, who are of a family far removed from them?</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Gregory
          answers.</span></span>—Most assuredly this may lawfully be done;
          for nothing is found in Holy Writ on this matter that seems to
          contradict it.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Augustine's Fifth
          Question.</span></span>—To what degree may the faithful marry with
          their kindred? and is it lawful to marry a stepmother or a
          brother's wife?</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Gregory
          answers.</span></span>—A certain secular law in the Roman
          commonwealth allows, that the son and daughter of a brother and
          sister,<a href="#note_125" id="noteref_125" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">125</span></span></a> or of
          two full brothers, or two sisters, may be joined in matrimony; but
          we have found, by experience, that the offspring of such wedlock
          cannot grow up; and the Divine law forbids a man to <span class="tei tei-q">“uncover the nakedness of his kindred.”</span> Hence of
          necessity it must be the third or fourth generation of the
          faithful, that can be lawfully joined in matrimony; for the second,
          which we have mentioned, must altogether abstain from one another.
          To marry with one's stepmother is a heinous crime, because it is
          written in the Law, <span class="tei tei-q">“Thou shalt not uncover
          the nakedness of thy father:”</span> now the son, indeed, cannot
          uncover his father's nakedness; but in regard that it is written,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“They twain shall be one flesh,”</span> he
          that presumes to uncover the nakedness of his stepmother, who was
          one flesh with his father, certainly uncovers the nakedness of his
          father. It is also prohibited to marry with a sister-in-law,
          because by the former union she is become the brother's flesh. For
          which thing <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page053">[pg
          053]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg053"/>
          also John the Baptist was beheaded, and obtained the crown of holy
          martyrdom. For, though he was not ordered to deny Christ, and it
          was not for confessing Christ that he was killed, yet inasmuch as
          the same Jesus Christ, our Lord, said, <span class="tei tei-q">“I
          am the Truth,”</span> because John was killed for the truth, he
          also shed his blood for Christ.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But forasmuch as
          there are many of the English, who, whilst they were still
          heathens, are said to have been joined in this unholy union, when
          they attain to the faith they are to be admonished to abstain, and
          be made to know that this is a grievous sin. Let them fear the
          dread judgement of God, lest, for the gratification of their carnal
          desires, they incur the torments of eternal punishment. Yet they
          are not on this account to be deprived of the Communion of the Body
          and Blood of Christ, lest they should seem to be punished for those
          things which they did through ignorance before they had received
          Baptism. For in these times the Holy Church chastises some things
          with zeal, and tolerates some in mercy, and is blind to some in her
          wisdom, and so, by forbearance and blindness often suppresses the
          evil that stands in her way. But all that come to the faith are to
          be admonished not to presume to do such things. And if any shall be
          guilty of them, they are to be excluded from the Communion of the
          Body and Blood of Christ. For as the offence is, in some measure,
          to be tolerated in those who did it through ignorance, so it is to
          be rigorously punished in those who do not fear to sin
          knowingly.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Augustine's Sixth
          Question.</span></span>—Whether a bishop may be consecrated without
          other bishops being present, if there be so great a distance
          between them, that they cannot easily come together?</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Gregory
          answers.</span></span>—In the Church of England, of which you are
          as yet the only bishop, you cannot otherwise ordain a bishop than
          in the absence of other bishops. For when do bishops come over from
          Gaul, that they may be present as witnesses to you in ordaining a
          bishop? But we would have you, my brother, to ordain bishops in
          such a manner, that the said bishops may not be far <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page054">[pg 054]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg054"/> asunder, to the end that there be no
          lack, but that at the ordination of a bishop other pastors also,
          whose presence is of great benefit, should easily come
          together.<a href="#note_126" id="noteref_126" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">126</span></span></a> Thus,
          when, by the help of God, bishops shall have been ordained in
          places near to one another, no ordination of a bishop is to take
          place without assembling three or four bishops. For, even in
          spiritual affairs, we may take example by the temporal, that they
          may be wisely and discreetly conducted. For surely, when marriages
          are celebrated in the world, some married persons are assembled,
          that those who went before in the way of matrimony, may also
          partake in the joy of the new union. Why, then, at this spiritual
          ordinance, wherein, by means of the sacred ministry, man is joined
          to God, should not such persons be assembled, as may either rejoice
          in the advancement of the new bishop, or jointly pour forth their
          prayers to Almighty God for his preservation?</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Augustine's Seventh
          Question.</span></span>—How are we to deal with the bishops of Gaul
          and Britain?</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Gregory
          answers.</span></span>—We give you no authority over the bishops of
          Gaul, because the bishop of Arles received the pall<a href="#note_127" id="noteref_127" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">127</span></span></a> in
          the old times of my predecessors, and we must by no means deprive
          him of the authority he has received. If it shall therefore happen,
          my brother, that you go over into the province of Gaul, you are to
          concert with the said bishop of Arles, how, if there be any faults
          among the bishops, they may be amended. And if he shall be lukewarm
          in keeping up discipline, he is to be <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page055">[pg 055]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg055"/> fired by your zeal; to whom we have also
          written, that aided by the presence of your Holiness in Gaul, he
          should exert himself to the utmost, and put away from the behaviour
          of the bishops all that is opposed to the command of our Creator.
          But you shall not have power to go beyond your own authority and
          judge the bishops of Gaul, but by persuading, and winning them, and
          showing good works for them to imitate, you shall recall the
          perverted to the pursuit of holiness; for it is written in the Law,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“When thou comest into the standing corn of
          thy neighbour, then thou mayest bruise the ears with thine hand and
          eat; but thou shalt not move a sickle unto thy neighbours' standing
          corn.”</span><a href="#note_128" id="noteref_128" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">128</span></span></a> For
          thou mayest not apply the sickle of judgement in that harvest which
          thou seest to have been committed to another; but by the influence
          of good works thou shalt clear the Lord's wheat of the chaff of its
          vices, and convert it by exhortation and persuasion in the body of
          the Church, as it were, by eating. But whatsoever is to be done by
          authority, must be transacted with the aforesaid bishop of Arles,
          lest that should be omitted, which the ancient institution of the
          fathers has appointed.<a href="#note_129" id="noteref_129" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">129</span></span></a> But
          as for all the bishops of Britain, we commit them to your care,
          that the unlearned may be taught, the weak strengthened by
          persuasion, and the perverse corrected by authority.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Augustine's Eighth
          Question.</span></span>—Whether a woman with child ought to be
          baptized? Or when she has brought forth, after what time she may
          come into the church? As also, after how many days the infant born
          may be baptized, lest he be prevented by death? Or how long after
          her husband may have carnal knowledge of her? Or whether it is
          lawful for her to come into the church when she has her courses, or
          to receive the Sacrament of Holy Communion? Or whether a man, under
          certain circumstances, may come into the church before he has
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page056">[pg 056]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg056"/> washed with water?
          Or approach to receive the Mystery of the Holy Communion? All which
          things are requisite to be known by the ignorant nation of the
          English.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Gregory
          answers.</span></span>—I do not doubt but that these questions have
          been put to you, my brother, and I think I have already answered
          you therein. But I believe you would wish the opinion which you
          yourself might give and hold to be confirmed by my reply also. Why
          should not a woman with child be baptized, since the fruitfulness
          of the flesh is no offence in the eyes of Almighty God? For when
          our first parents sinned in Paradise, they forfeited the
          immortality which they had received, by the just judgement of God.
          Because, therefore, Almighty God would not for their fault wholly
          destroy the human race, he both deprived man of immortality for his
          sin, and, at the same time, of his great goodness and
          loving-kindness, reserved to him the power of propagating his race
          after him. On what ground, then, can that which is preserved to
          human nature by the free gift of Almighty God, be excluded from the
          privilege of Holy Baptism? For it is very foolish to imagine that
          the gift can be opposed to grace in that Mystery in which all sin
          is blotted out. When a woman is delivered, after how many days she
          may come into the church, you have learnt from the teaching of the
          Old Testament, to wit, that she is to abstain for a male child
          thirty-three days, and sixty-six for a female. Now you must know
          that this is to be received in a mystery; for if she enters the
          church the very hour that she is delivered, to return thanks, she
          is not guilty of any sin; because the pleasure of the flesh is a
          fault, and not the pain; but the pleasure is in the copulation of
          the flesh, whereas there is pain in bringing forth the child.
          Wherefore it is said to the first mother of all, <span class="tei tei-q">“In sorrow thou shalt bring forth children.”</span> If,
          therefore, we forbid a woman that has brought forth, to enter the
          church, we make a crime of her very punishment. To baptize either a
          woman who has brought forth, if there be danger of death, even the
          very hour that she brings forth, or that which she has brought
          forth the very hour it is born, is in no way prohibited, because,
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page057">[pg 057]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg057"/> as the grace of the
          Holy Mystery is to be with much discretion provided for those who
          are in full life and capable of understanding, so is it to be
          without any delay administered to the dying; lest, while a further
          time is sought to confer the Mystery of redemption, if a small
          delay intervene, the person that is to be redeemed be dead and
          gone.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Her husband is
          not to approach her, till the infant born be weaned. An evil custom
          is sprung up in the lives of married people, in that women disdain
          to suckle the children whom they bring forth, and give them to
          other women to suckle; which seems to have been invented on no
          other account but incontinency; because, as they will not be
          continent, they will not suckle the children whom they bear. Those
          women, therefore, who, from evil custom, give their children to
          others to bring up, must not approach their husbands till the time
          of purification is past. For even when there has been no
          child-birth, women are forbidden to do so, whilst they have their
          courses, insomuch that the Law condemns to death any man that shall
          approach unto a woman during her uncleanness. Yet the woman,
          nevertheless, must not be forbidden to come into the church whilst
          she has her courses; because the superfluity of nature cannot be
          imputed to her as a crime; and it is not just that she should be
          refused admittance into the church, for that which she suffers
          against her will. For we know, that the woman who had the issue of
          blood, humbly approaching behind our Lord's back, touched the hem
          of his garment, and her infirmity immediately departed from her.
          If, therefore, she that had an issue of blood might commendably
          touch the garment of our Lord, why may not she, who has her
          courses, lawfully enter into the church of God? But you may say,
          Her infirmity compelled her, whereas these we speak of are bound by
          custom. Consider, then, most dear brother, that all we suffer in
          this mortal flesh, through the infirmity of our nature, is ordained
          by the just judgement of God after the fall; for to hunger, to
          thirst, to be hot, to be cold, to be weary, is from the
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page058">[pg 058]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg058"/> infirmity of our
          nature; and what else is it to seek food against hunger, drink
          against thirst, air against heat, clothes against cold, rest
          against weariness, than to procure a remedy against distempers?
          Thus to a woman her courses are a distemper. If, therefore, it was
          a commendable boldness in her, who in her disease touched our
          Lord's garment, why may not that which is allowed to one infirm
          person, be granted to all women, who, through the fault of their
          nature, are rendered infirm?</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">She must not,
          therefore, be forbidden to receive the Mystery of the Holy
          Communion during those days. But if any one out of profound respect
          does not presume to do it, she is to be commended; yet if she
          receives it, she is not to be judged. For it is the part of noble
          minds in some manner to acknowledge their faults, even when there
          is no fault; because very often that is done without a fault,
          which, nevertheless, proceeded from a fault. Thus, when we are
          hungry, it is no sin to eat; yet our being hungry proceeds from the
          sin of the first man. The courses are no sin in women, because they
          happen naturally; yet, because our nature itself is so depraved,
          that it appears to be defiled even without the concurrence of the
          will, a defect arises from sin, and thereby human nature may itself
          know what it is become by judgement. And let man, who wilfully
          committed the offence, bear the guilt of that offence against his
          will. And, therefore, let women consider with themselves, and if
          they do not presume, during their courses, to approach the
          Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our Lord, they are to be
          commended for their praiseworthy consideration; but when they are
          carried away with love of the same Mystery to receive it according
          to the custom of the religious life, they are not to be restrained,
          as we said before. For as in the Old Testament the outward works
          are observed, so in the New Testament, that which is outwardly
          done, is not so diligently regarded as that which is inwardly
          thought, that the punishment may be with discernment. For whereas
          the Law forbids the eating of many things as unclean, yet our Lord
          says in the Gospel, <span class="tei tei-q">“Not that which goeth
          into the mouth defileth <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page059">[pg
          059]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg059"/> a
          man; but that which cometh out of the mouth, this defileth a
          man.”</span> And afterwards he added, expounding the same,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Out of the heart proceed evil
          thoughts.”</span> Where it is abundantly shown, that that is
          declared by Almighty God to be polluted in deed, which springs from
          the root of a polluted thought. Whence also Paul the Apostle says,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Unto the pure all things are pure, but
          unto them that are defiled and unbelieving, nothing is
          pure.”</span> And presently, declaring the cause of that
          defilement, he adds, <span class="tei tei-q">“For even their mind
          and conscience is defiled.”</span> If, therefore, meat is not
          unclean to him whose mind is not unclean, why shall that which a
          woman suffers according to nature, with a clean mind, be imputed to
          her as uncleanness?</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">A man who has
          approached his own wife is not to enter the church unless washed
          with water, nor is he to enter immediately although washed. The Law
          prescribed to the ancient people, that a man in such cases should
          be washed with water, and not enter into the church before the
          setting of the sun. Which, nevertheless, may be understood
          spiritually, because a man acts so when the mind is led by the
          imagination to unlawful concupiscence; for unless the fire of
          concupiscence be first driven from his mind, he is not to think
          himself worthy of the congregation of the brethren, while he sees
          himself burdened by the iniquity of a perverted will. For though
          divers nations have divers opinions concerning this affair, and
          seem to observe different rules, it was always the custom of the
          Romans, from ancient times, for such an one to seek to be cleansed
          by washing, and for some time reverently to forbear entering the
          church. Nor do we, in so saying, assign matrimony to be a fault;
          but forasmuch as lawful intercourse cannot be had without the
          pleasure of the flesh, it is proper to forbear entering the holy
          place, because the pleasure itself cannot be without a fault. For
          he was not born of adultery or fornication, but of lawful marriage,
          who said, <span class="tei tei-q">“Behold I was conceived in
          iniquity, and in sin my mother brought me forth.”</span> For he who
          knew himself to have been conceived in iniquity, lamented that he
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page060">[pg 060]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg060"/> was born from sin,
          because he bears the defect, as a tree bears in its bough the sap
          it drew from the root. In which words, however, he does not call
          the union of the married couple iniquity, but the will itself. For
          there are many things which are lawful and permitted, and yet we
          are somewhat defiled in doing them. As very often by being angry we
          correct faults, and at the same time disturb our own peace of mind;
          and though that which we do is right, yet it is not to be approved
          that our mind should be disturbed. For he who said, <span class="tei tei-q">“My eye was disturbed with anger,”</span> had been
          angry at the vices of sinners. Now, seeing that only a calm mind
          can rest in the light of contemplation, he grieved that his eye was
          disturbed with anger; because, whilst he was correcting evil
          actions below, he was obliged to be confused and disturbed with
          regard to the contemplation of the highest things. Anger against
          vice is, therefore, commendable, and yet painful to a man, because
          he thinks that by his mind being agitated, he has incurred some
          guilt. Lawful commerce, therefore, must be for the sake of
          children, not of pleasure; and must be to procure offspring, not to
          satisfy vices. But if any man is led not by the desire of pleasure,
          but only for the sake of getting children, such a man is certainly
          to be left to his own judgement, either as to entering the church,
          or as to receiving the Mystery of the Body and Blood of our Lord,
          which he, who being placed in the fire cannot burn, is not to be
          forbidden by us to receive. But when, not the love of getting
          children, but of pleasure prevails, the pair have cause to lament
          their deed. For this the holy preaching concedes to them, and yet
          fills the mind with dread of the very concession. For when Paul the
          Apostle said, <span class="tei tei-q">“Let him that cannot contain
          have his own wife;”</span> he presently took care to subjoin,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“But this I say by way of permission, not
          of commandment.”</span> For that is not granted by way of
          permission which is lawful, because it is just; and, therefore,
          that which he said he permitted, he showed to be an offence.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">It is seriously
          to be considered, that when God was about to speak to the people on
          Mount Sinai, He first <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page061">[pg
          061]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg061"/>
          commanded them to abstain from women. And if purity of body was
          there so carefully required, where God spoke to the people by the
          means of a creature as His representative, that those who were to
          hear the words of God should abstain; how much more ought women,
          who receive the Body of Almighty God, to preserve themselves in
          purity of flesh, lest they be burdened with the very greatness of
          that inestimable Mystery? For this reason also, it was said to
          David, concerning his men, by the priest, that if they were clean
          in this particular, they should receive the shewbread, which they
          would not have received at all, had not David first declared them
          to be clean. Then the man, who, afterwards, has been washed with
          water, is also capable of receiving the Mystery of the Holy
          Communion, when it is lawful for him, according to what has been
          before declared, to enter the church.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Augustine's Ninth
          Question.</span></span>—Whether after an illusion, such as is wont
          to happen in a dream, any man may receive the Body of our Lord, or
          if he be a priest, celebrate the Divine Mysteries?</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Gregory
          answers.</span></span>—The Testament of the Old Law, as has been
          said already in the article above, calls such a man polluted, and
          allows him not to enter into the church till the evening, after
          being washed with water. Which, nevertheless, a spiritual people,
          taking in another sense, will understand in the same manner as
          above; because he is imposed upon as it were in a dream, who, being
          tempted with uncleanness, is defiled by real representations in
          thought, and he is to be washed with water, that he may cleanse
          away the sins of thought with tears; and unless the fire of
          temptation depart before, may know himself to be in a manner guilty
          until the evening. But a distinction is very necessary in that
          illusion, and one must carefully consider what causes it to arise
          in the mind of the person sleeping; for sometimes it proceeds from
          excess of eating or drinking; sometimes from the superfluity or
          infirmity of nature, and sometimes from the thoughts. And when it
          happens either through superfluity or infirmity of nature, such an
          illusion is not <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page062">[pg
          062]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg062"/>
          to be feared at all, because it is to be lamented, that the mind of
          the person, who knew nothing of it, suffers the same, rather than
          that he occasioned it. But when the appetite of gluttony commits
          excess in food, and thereupon the receptacles of the humours are
          oppressed, the mind thence contracts some guilt; yet not so much as
          to hinder the receiving of the Holy Mystery, or celebrating Mass,
          when a holy day requires it, or necessity obliges the Mystery to be
          shown forth, because there is no other priest in the place; for if
          there be others who can perform the ministry, the illusion
          proceeding from over-eating ought not to exclude a man from
          receiving the sacred Mystery; but I am of opinion he ought humbly
          to abstain from offering the sacrifice of the Mystery, but not from
          receiving it, unless the mind of the person sleeping has been
          disturbed with some foul imagination. For there are some, who for
          the most part so suffer the illusion, that their mind, even during
          the sleep of the body, is not defiled with filthy thoughts. In
          which case, one thing is evident, that the mind is guilty, not
          being acquitted even in its own judgement; for though it does not
          remember to have seen anything whilst the body was sleeping, yet it
          calls to mind that, when the body was awake, it fell into gluttony.
          But if the illusion of the sleeper proceeds from evil thoughts when
          he was awake, then its guilt is manifest to the mind; for the man
          perceives from what root that defilement sprang, because what he
          had consciously thought of, that he afterwards unconsciously
          endured. But it is to be considered, whether that thought was no
          more than a suggestion, or proceeded to delight, or, what is worse,
          consented to sin. For all sin is committed in three ways, viz., by
          suggestion, by delight, and by consent. Suggestion comes from the
          Devil, delight from the flesh, and consent from the spirit. For the
          serpent suggested the first offence, and Eve, as flesh, took
          delight in it, but Adam, as the spirit, consented. And when the
          mind sits in judgement on itself, it must clearly distinguish
          between suggestion and delight, and between delight and consent.
          For when the evil spirit suggests a sin to the mind, if there ensue
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page063">[pg 063]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg063"/> no delight in the
          sin, the sin is in no way committed; but when the flesh begins to
          take delight in it, then sin begins to arise. But if it
          deliberately consents, then the sin is known to be full-grown. The
          seed, therefore, of sin is in the suggestion, the nourishment of it
          in delight, its maturity in the consent. And it often happens that
          what the evil spirit sows in the thought, in that the flesh begins
          to find delight, and yet the soul does not consent to that delight.
          And whereas the flesh cannot be delighted without the mind, yet the
          mind struggling against the pleasures of the flesh, is after a
          manner unwillingly bound by the carnal delight, so that through
          reason it opposes it, and does not consent, yet being bound by
          delight, it grievously laments being so bound. Wherefore that great
          soldier of our Lord's host, groaned and said, <span class="tei tei-q">“I see another law in my members warring against the
          law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin,
          which is in my members.”</span> Now if he was a captive, he did not
          fight; but he did fight; wherefore he was a captive and at the same
          time therefore fought against the law of the mind, which the law
          that is in the members opposed; but if he fought, he was no
          captive. Thus, then, man is, as I may say, a captive and yet free.
          Free on account of justice, which he loves, a captive by the
          delight which he unwillingly bears within him.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc67"/> <a id="pdf68"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XXVIII. How Pope Gregory wrote
          to the bishop of Arles to help Augustine in the work of God.
          [601</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Thus far the
          answers of the holy Pope Gregory, to the questions of the most
          reverend prelate, Augustine. Now the letter, which he says he had
          written to the bishop of Arles, was directed to Vergilius,
          successor to Aetherius,<a href="#note_130" id="noteref_130" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">130</span></span></a> and
          was in the following words:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">To his most reverend and holy brother and
          fellow bishop, Vergilius; Gregory, servant of the servants of
          God.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page064">[pg
          064]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg064"/>
          With how much kindness brethren, coming of their own accord, are to
          be entertained, is shown by this, that they are for the most part
          invited for the sake of brotherly love. Therefore, if our common
          brother, Bishop Augustine, shall happen to come to you, let your
          love, as is becoming, receive him with so great kindness and
          affection, that it may refresh him by the benefit of its
          consolation and show to others how brotherly charity is to be
          cultivated. And, since it often happens that those who are at a
          distance first learn from others the things that need correction,
          if he bring before you, my brother, any sins of bishops or others,
          do you, in conjunction with him, carefully inquire into the same,
          and show yourself so strict and earnest with regard to those things
          which offend God and provoke His wrath, that for the amendment of
          others, the punishment may fall upon the guilty, and the innocent
          may not suffer under false report. God keep you in safety, most
          reverend brother. Given the 22nd day of June, in the nineteenth
          year of the reign of our most religious lord, Mauritius Tiberius
          Augustus, the eighteenth year after the consulship of our said
          lord, and the fourth indiction.”</span></p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc69"/> <a id="pdf70"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_I_Chap_XXIX"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XXIX. How the same Pope sent to
          Augustine the Pall and a letter, along with several ministers of
          the Word. [601</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Moreover, the
          same Pope Gregory, hearing from Bishop Augustine, that the harvest
          which he had was great and the labourers but few, sent to him,
          together with his aforesaid envoys, certain fellow labourers and
          ministers of the Word, of whom the chief and foremost were
          Mellitus, Justus, Paulinus, and Rufinianus,<a href="#note_131" id="noteref_131" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">131</span></span></a> and
          by them all <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page065">[pg
          065]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg065"/>
          things in general that were necessary for the worship and service
          of the Church, to wit, sacred vessels and altar-cloths, also
          church-furniture, and vestments for the bishops and clerks, as
          likewise relics of the holy Apostles and martyrs; besides many
          manuscripts. He also sent a letter, wherein he signified that he
          had despatched the pall to him, and at the same time directed how
          he should constitute bishops in Britain. The letter was in these
          words:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">To his most reverend and holy brother and
          fellow bishop, Augustine; Gregory, the servant of the servants of
          God.</span></span> Though it be certain, that the unspeakable
          rewards of the eternal kingdom are reserved for those who labour
          for Almighty God, yet it is requisite that we bestow on them the
          benefit of honours, to the end that they may by this recompense be
          encouraged the more vigorously to apply themselves to the care of
          their spiritual work. And, seeing that the new Church of the
          English is, through the bounty of the Lord, and your labours,
          brought to the grace of God, we grant you the use of the pall in
          the same, only for the celebration of the solemn service of the
          Mass; that so you may ordain twelve bishops in different places,
          who shall be subject to your jurisdiction. But the bishop of London
          shall, for the future, be always consecrated by his own synod, and
          receive the pall, which is the token of his office, from this holy
          and Apostolic see, which I, by the grace of God, now serve. But we
          would have you send to the city of York such a bishop as you shall
          think fit to ordain; yet so, that if that city, with the places
          adjoining, shall receive the Word of God, that bishop shall also
          ordain twelve bishops, and enjoy the honour of a metropolitan; for
          we design, if we live, by the help of God, to bestow on him also
          the pall; and yet we would have him to be subject to your
          authority, my brother; but after your decease, he shall so preside
          over the bishops he shall have ordained, as to be in no way subject
          to the jurisdiction of the bishop of London. But for the future let
          there be this distinction as regards honour between the bishops of
          the cities of London and York, that he who has been <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page066">[pg 066]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg066"/> first ordained have the
          precedence.<a href="#note_132" id="noteref_132" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">132</span></span></a> But
          let them take counsel and act in concert and with one mind dispose
          whatsoever is to be done for zeal of Christ; let them judge
          rightly, and carry out their judgement without
          dissension.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But to you, my brother, shall, by the authority of our
          God and Lord Jesus Christ, be subject not only those bishops whom
          you shall ordain, and those that shall be ordained by the bishop of
          York, but also all the prelates in Britain; to the end that from
          the words and manner of life of your Holiness they may learn the
          rule of a right belief and a good life, and fulfilling their office
          in faith and righteousness, they may, when it shall please the
          Lord, attain to the kingdom of Heaven. God preserve you in safety,
          most reverend brother.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Given the 22nd of June, in the nineteenth year of the
          reign of our most religious lord, Mauritius Tiberius Augustus, the
          eighteenth year after the consulship of our said lord, and the
          fourth indiction.”</span></p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc71"/> <a id="pdf72"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XXX. A copy of the letter which
          Pope Gregory sent to the Abbot Mellitus, then going into Britain.
          [601</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The aforesaid
          envoys having departed, the blessed Father Gregory sent after them
          a letter worthy to be recorded, wherein he plainly shows how
          carefully he watched over the salvation of our country. The letter
          was as follows:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">To his most beloved son, the Abbot Mellitus;
          Gregory, the servant of the servants of God.</span></span> We have
          been much concerned, since the departure of our people that are
          with you, because we have received no account of the success of
          your journey. Howbeit, when Almighty God has led you to the most
          reverend Bishop Augustine, our brother, tell him what I have long
          been considering <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page067">[pg
          067]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg067"/>
          in my own mind concerning the matter of the English people; to wit,
          that the temples of the idols in that nation ought not to be
          destroyed; but let the idols that are in them be destroyed; let
          water be consecrated and sprinkled in the said temples, let altars
          be erected, and relics placed there. For if those temples are well
          built, it is requisite that they be converted from the worship of
          devils to the service of the true God; that the nation, seeing that
          their temples are not destroyed, may remove error from their
          hearts, and knowing and adoring the true God, may the more freely
          resort to the places to which they have been accustomed. And
          because they are used to slaughter many oxen in sacrifice to
          devils, some solemnity must be given them in exchange for this, as
          that on the day of the dedication, or the nativities of the holy
          martyrs, whose relics are there deposited, they should build
          themselves huts of the boughs of trees about those churches which
          have been turned to that use from being temples, and celebrate the
          solemnity with religious feasting, and no more offer animals to the
          Devil, but kill cattle and glorify God in their feast, and return
          thanks to the Giver of all things for their abundance; to the end
          that, whilst some outward gratifications are retained, they may the
          more easily consent to the inward joys. For there is no doubt that
          it is impossible to cut off every thing at once from their rude
          natures; because he who endeavours to ascend to the highest place
          rises by degrees or steps, and not by leaps. Thus the Lord made
          Himself known to the people of Israel in Egypt; and yet He allowed
          them the use, in His own worship, of the sacrifices which they were
          wont to offer to the Devil, commanding them in His sacrifice to
          kill animals, to the end that, with changed hearts, they might lay
          aside one part of the sacrifice, whilst they retained another; and
          although the animals were the same as those which they were wont to
          offer, they should offer them to the true God, and not to idols;
          and thus they would no longer be the same sacrifices. This then,
          dearly beloved, it behoves you to communicate to our aforesaid
          brother, that he, being placed where he is at <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page068">[pg 068]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg068"/> present, may consider how he is to
          order all things. God preserve you in safety, most beloved
          son.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Given the 17th of June,<a href="#note_133" id="noteref_133" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">133</span></span></a> in
          the nineteenth year of the reign of our most religious lord,
          Mauritius Tiberius Augustus, the eighteenth year after the
          consulship of our said lord, and the fourth indiction.”</span></p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc73"/> <a id="pdf74"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XXXI. How Pope Gregory, by
          letter, exhorted Augustine not to glory in his miracles.
          [601</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At which time he
          also sent Augustine a letter concerning the miracles that he had
          heard had been wrought by him; wherein he admonishes him not to
          incur the danger of being puffed up by the number of them. The
          letter was in these words:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I know, dearly beloved brother, that Almighty God, by
          means of you, shows forth great miracles to the nation which it was
          His will to choose. Wherefore you must needs rejoice with fear, and
          fear with joy concerning that heavenly gift; for you will rejoice
          because the souls of the English are by outward miracles drawn to
          inward grace; but you will fear, lest, amidst the wonders that are
          wrought, the weak mind may be puffed up with self-esteem, and that
          whereby it is outwardly raised to honour cause it inwardly to fall
          through vain-glory. For we must call to mind, that when the
          disciples returned with joy from preaching, and said to their
          Heavenly Master, <span class="tei tei-q">‘Lord, even the devils are
          subject to us through Thy Name;’</span> forthwith they received the
          reply, <span class="tei tei-q">‘In this rejoice not; but rather
          rejoice, because your names are written in heaven.’</span><a href="#note_134" id="noteref_134" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">134</span></span></a> For
          their minds were set on private and temporal joys, when they
          rejoiced in miracles; but they are recalled from the private to the
          common <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page069">[pg
          069]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg069"/>
          joy, and from the temporal to the eternal, when it is said to them,
          <span class="tei tei-q">‘Rejoice in this, because your names are
          written in heaven.’</span> For all the elect do not work miracles,
          and yet the names of all are written in heaven. For those who are
          disciples of the truth ought not to rejoice, save for that good
          thing which all men enjoy as well as they, and in which their joy
          shall be without end.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“It remains, therefore, most dear brother, that amidst
          those outward actions, which you perform through the power of the
          Lord, you should always carefully judge yourself in your heart, and
          carefully understand both what you are yourself, and how much grace
          is bestowed upon that same nation, for the conversion of which you
          have received even the gift of working miracles. And if you
          remember that you have at any time sinned against our Creator,
          either by word or deed, always call it to mind, to the end that the
          remembrance of your guilt may crush the vanity which rises in your
          heart. And whatsoever gift of working miracles you either shall
          receive, or have received, consider the same, not as conferred on
          you, but on those for whose salvation it has been given
          you.”</span></p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc75"/> <a id="pdf76"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XXXII. How Pope Gregory sent
          letters and gifts to King Ethelbert. [601</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The same blessed
          Pope Gregory, at the same time, sent a letter to King Ethelbert,
          with many gifts of divers sorts; being desirous to glorify the king
          with temporal honours, at the same time that he rejoiced that
          through his own labour and zeal he had attained to the knowledge of
          heavenly glory. The copy of the said letter is as follows:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">To the most glorious lord, and his most
          excellent son, Ethelbert, king of the English, Bishop
          Gregory.</span></span> Almighty God advances good men to the
          government of nations, that He may by their means bestow the gifts
          of His loving-kindness on those over whom they are placed. This we
          know to have come to pass in the English nation, over whom your
          Highness was placed, to the end, that by <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page070">[pg 070]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg070"/> means of the blessings which are granted to
          you, heavenly benefits might also be conferred on your subjects.
          Therefore, my illustrious son, do you carefully guard the grace
          which you have received from the Divine goodness, and be eager to
          spread the Christian faith among the people under your rule; in all
          uprightness increase your zeal for their conversion; suppress the
          worship of idols; overthrow the structures of the temples;
          establish the manners of your subjects by much cleanness of life,
          exhorting, terrifying, winning, correcting, and showing forth an
          example of good works, that you may obtain your reward in Heaven
          from Him, Whose Name and the knowledge of Whom you have spread
          abroad upon earth. For He, Whose honour you seek and maintain among
          the nations, will also render your Majesty's name more glorious
          even to posterity.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“For even so the most pious emperor, Constantine, of
          old, recovering the Roman commonwealth from the false worship of
          idols, brought it with himself into subjection to Almighty God, our
          Lord Jesus Christ, and turned to Him with his whole mind, together
          with the nations under his rule. Whence it followed, that his
          praises transcended the fame of former princes; and he excelled his
          predecessors in renown as much as in good works. Now, therefore,
          let your Highness hasten to impart to the kings and peoples that
          are subject to you, the knowledge of one God, Father, Son, and Holy
          Ghost; that you may surpass the ancient kings of your nation in
          praise and merit, and while you cause the sins of others among your
          own subjects to be blotted out, become the more free from anxiety
          with regard to your own sins before the dread judgement of Almighty
          God.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Willingly hear, devoutly perform, and studiously
          retain in your memory, whatsoever counsel shall be given you by our
          most reverend brother, Bishop Augustine, who is trained up in the
          monastic rule, full of the knowledge of Holy Scripture, and, by the
          help of God, endued with good works; for if you give ear to him
          when he speaks on behalf of Almighty God, the sooner will Almighty
          God hear his prayers for you. But if (which God <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page071">[pg 071]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg071"/> forbid!) you slight his words, how
          shall Almighty God hear him on your behalf, when you neglect to
          hear him on behalf of God? Unite yourself, therefore, to him with
          all your mind, in the fervour of faith, and further his endeavours,
          by that virtue which God has given you, that He may make you
          partaker of His kingdom, Whose faith you cause to be received and
          maintained in your own.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Besides, we would have your Highness know that, as we
          find in Holy Scripture from the words of the Almighty Lord, the end
          of this present world, and the kingdom of the saints, which will
          never come to an end, is at hand. But as the end of the world draws
          near, many things are about to come upon us which were not before,
          to wit, changes in the air, and terrors from heaven, and tempests
          out of the order of the seasons, wars, famines, pestilences,
          earthquakes in divers places; which things will not, nevertheless,
          all happen in our days, but will all follow after our days. If,
          therefore, you perceive that any of these things come to pass in
          your country, let not your mind be in any way disturbed; for these
          signs of the end of the world are sent before, for this reason,
          that we may take heed to our souls, and be watchful for the hour of
          death, and may be found prepared with good works to meet our Judge.
          Thus much, my illustrious son, I have said in few words, with
          intent that when the Christian faith is spread abroad in your
          kingdom, our discourse to you may also be more copious, and we may
          desire to say the more, as joy for the full conversion of your
          nation is increased in our mind.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I have sent you some small gifts, which will not
          appear small to you, when received by you with the blessing of the
          blessed Apostle, Peter. May Almighty God, therefore, perfect in you
          His grace which He has begun, and prolong your life here through a
          course of many years, and in the fulness of time receive you into
          the congregation of the heavenly country. May the grace of God
          preserve you in safety, my most excellent lord and son.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Given the 22nd day of June, in the nineteenth year of
          the reign of our most religious lord, Mauritius <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page072">[pg 072]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg072"/> Tiberius Augustus, in the eighteenth
          year after his consulship, and the fourth indiction.”</span></p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc77"/> <a id="pdf78"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_I_Chap_XXXIII"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XXXIII. How Augustine repaired
          the church of our Saviour, and built the monastery of the blessed
          Peter the Apostle; and concerning Peter the first abbot of the
          same.</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Augustine having
          had his episcopal see granted him in the royal city, as has been
          said, recovered therein, with the support of the king, a church,
          which he was informed had been built of old by the faithful among
          the Romans, and consecrated it in the name of the Holy Saviour, our
          Divine Lord Jesus Christ, and there established a residence for
          himself and all his successors.<a href="#note_135" id="noteref_135" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">135</span></span></a> He
          also built a monastery not far from the city to the eastward, in
          which, by his advice, Ethelbert erected from the foundation the
          church of the blessed Apostles, Peter and Paul,<a href="#note_136" id="noteref_136" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">136</span></span></a> and
          enriched it with divers gifts; wherein the bodies of the same
          Augustine, and of all the bishops of Canterbury, and of the kings
          of Kent, might be buried. Nevertheless, it was not Augustine
          himself who consecrated that church, but Laurentius, his
          successor.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The first abbot
          of that monastery was the priest Peter,<a href="#note_137" id="noteref_137" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">137</span></span></a> who,
          being sent on a mission into Gaul, was drowned in a bay of the sea,
          which is called Amfleat,<a href="#note_138" id="noteref_138" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">138</span></span></a> and
          committed to a humble tomb by the inhabitants of the place; but
          since it was the will of Almighty God to reveal his <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page073">[pg 073]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg073"/> merits, a light from Heaven was seen
          over his grave every night; till the neighbouring people who saw
          it, perceiving that he had been a holy man that was buried there,
          and inquiring who and whence he was, carried away the body, and
          interred it in the church, in the city of Boulogne, with the honour
          due to so great a person.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc79"/> <a id="pdf80"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_I_Chap_XXXIV"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XXXIV. How Ethelfrid, king of
          the Northumbrians, having vanquished the nations of the Scots,
          expelled them from the territories of the English. [603</span>
<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At this time,
          the brave and ambitious king, Ethelfrid,<a href="#note_139" id="noteref_139" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">139</span></span></a>
          governed the kingdom of the Northumbrians, and ravaged the Britons
          more than all the chiefs of the English, insomuch that he might be
          compared to Saul of old, king of the Israelites, save only in this,
          that he was ignorant of Divine religion. For he conquered more
          territories from the Britons than any other chieftain or king,
          either subduing the inhabitants and making them tributary, or
          driving them out and planting the English in their places. To him
          might justly be applied the saying of the patriarch blessing his
          son in the person of Saul, <span class="tei tei-q">“Benjamin shall
          ravin as a wolf; in the morning he shall devour the prey, and at
          night he shall divide the spoil.”</span><a href="#note_140" id="noteref_140" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">140</span></span></a>
          Hereupon, Aedan, king of the Scots that dwell in Britain,<a href="#note_141" id="noteref_141" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">141</span></span></a> being
          alarmed by his success, came against him with a great and mighty
          army, but was defeated and fled with a few followers; for almost
          all his army was cut to pieces at a famous place, called Degsastan,
          that is, Degsa Stone.<a href="#note_142" id="noteref_142" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">142</span></span></a> In
          which battle also Theodbald, brother to Ethelfrid, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page074">[pg 074]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg074"/> was killed, with almost all the forces
          he commanded. This war Ethelfrid brought to an end in the year of
          our Lord 603, the eleventh of his own reign, which lasted
          twenty-four years, and the first year of the reign of Phocas, who
          then was at the head of the Roman empire. From that time, no king
          of the Scots durst come into Britain to make war on the English to
          this day.</p>
</div>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page075">[pg 075]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg075"/>
<hr class="page"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 5.00em; margin-top: 5.00em">
<a id="toc81"/> <a id="pdf82"/>
<h1 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 3.46em; margin-top: 3.46em">
<span style="font-size: 173%">Book II</span></h1>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc83"/> <a id="pdf84"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_II_Chap_I"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. I. Of the death of the blessed
          Pope Gregory.</span><a href="#note_143" id="noteref_143" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">143</span></span></a><span style="font-size: 144%">[604</span>
<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At this time,
          that is, in the year of our Lord 605,<a href="#note_144" id="noteref_144" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">144</span></span></a> the
          blessed Pope Gregory, after having most gloriously governed the
          Roman Apostolic see thirteen years, six months, and ten days, died,
          and was translated to an eternal abode in the kingdom of Heaven. Of
          whom, seeing that by his zeal he converted our nation, the English,
          from the power of Satan to the faith of Christ, it behoves us to
          discourse more at large in our Ecclesiastical History, for we may
          rightly, nay, we must, call him our apostle; because, as soon as he
          began to wield the pontifical power over all the world, and was
          placed over the Churches long before converted to the true faith,
          he made our nation, till then enslaved to idols, the Church of
          Christ, so that concerning him we may use those words of the
          Apostle; <span class="tei tei-q">“if he be not an apostle to
          others, yet doubtless he is to us; for the seal of his apostleship
          are we in the Lord.”</span><a href="#note_145" id="noteref_145" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">145</span></span></a></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He was by nation
          a Roman, son of Gordianus, tracing his descent from ancestors that
          were not only noble, but religious. Moreover Felix, once bishop of
          the same Apostolic see, a man of great honour in Christ and in the
          Church, was his forefather.<a href="#note_146" id="noteref_146" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">146</span></span></a> Nor
          did he show his <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page076">[pg
          076]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg076"/>
          nobility in religion by less strength of devotion than his parents
          and kindred. But that nobility of this world which was seen in him,
          by the help of the Divine Grace, he used only to gain the glory of
          eternal dignity; for soon quitting his secular habit, he entered a
          monastery, wherein he began to live with so much grace of
          perfection that (as he was wont afterwards with tears to testify)
          his mind was above all transitory things; that he rose superior to
          all that is subject to change; that he used to think of nothing but
          what was heavenly; that, whilst detained by the body, he broke
          through the bonds of the flesh by contemplation; and that he even
          loved death, which is a penalty to almost all men, as the entrance
          into life, and the reward of his labours. This he used to say of
          himself, not to boast of his progress in virtue, but rather to
          bewail the falling off which he imagined he had sustained through
          his pastoral charge. Indeed, once in a private conversation with
          his deacon, Peter, after having enumerated the former virtues of
          his soul, he added sorrowfully, <span class="tei tei-q">“But now,
          on account of the pastoral charge, it is entangled with the affairs
          of laymen, and, after so fair an appearance of inward peace, is
          defiled with the dust of earthly action. And having wasted itself
          on outward things, by turning aside to the affairs of many men,
          even when it desires the inward things, it returns to them
          undoubtedly impaired. I therefore consider what I endure, I
          consider what I have lost, and when I behold what I have thrown
          away, that which I bear appears the more grievous.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">So spake the
          holy man constrained by his great humility. But it behoves us to
          believe that he lost nothing of his monastic perfection by reason
          of his pastoral charge, but rather that he gained greater profit
          through the labour of converting many, than by the former calm of
          his private life, and chiefly because, whilst holding the
          pontifical office, he set about organizing his house like a
          monastery. And when first drawn from the monastery, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page077">[pg 077]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg077"/> ordained to the ministry of the altar,
          and sent to Constantinople as representative<a href="#note_147" id="noteref_147" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">147</span></span></a> of
          the Apostolic see, though he now took part in the secular affairs
          of the palace, yet he did not abandon the fixed course of his
          heavenly life; for some of the brethren of his monastery, who had
          followed him to the royal city in their brotherly love, he employed
          for the better observance of monastic rule, to the end that at all
          times, by their example, as he writes himself, he might be held
          fast to the calm shore of prayer, as it were, with the cable of an
          anchor, whilst he should be tossed up and down by the ceaseless
          waves of worldly affairs; and daily in the intercourse of studious
          reading with them, strengthen his mind shaken with temporal
          concerns. By their company he was not only guarded against the
          assaults of the world, but more and more roused to the exercises of
          a heavenly life.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">For they
          persuaded him to interpret by a mystical exposition the book of the
          blessed Job,<a href="#note_148" id="noteref_148" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">148</span></span></a> which
          is involved in great obscurity; nor could he refuse to undertake
          that work, which brotherly affection imposed on him for the future
          benefit of many; but in a wonderful manner, in five and thirty
          books of exposition, he taught how that same book is to be
          understood literally; how to be referred to <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page078">[pg 078]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg078"/> the mysteries of Christ and the Church;
          and in what sense it is to be adapted to every one of the faithful.
          This work he began as papal representative in the royal city, but
          finished it at Rome after being made pope. Whilst he was still in
          the royal city, by the help of the grace of Catholic truth, he
          crushed in its first rise a new heresy which sprang up there,
          concerning the state of our resurrection. For Eutychius,<a href="#note_149" id="noteref_149" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">149</span></span></a>
          bishop of that city, taught, that our body, in the glory of
          resurrection, would be impalpable, and more subtile than wind and
          air. The blessed Gregory hearing this, proved by force of truth,
          and by the instance of the Resurrection of our Lord, that this
          doctrine was every way opposed to the orthodox faith. For the
          Catholic faith holds that our body, raised by the glory of
          immortality, is indeed rendered subtile by the effect of spiritual
          power, but is palpable by the reality of nature; according to the
          example of our Lord's Body, concerning which, when risen from the
          dead, He Himself says to His disciples, <span class="tei tei-q">“Handle Me and see, for a spirit hath not flesh and
          bones, as ye see Me have.”</span><a href="#note_150" id="noteref_150" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">150</span></span></a> In
          maintaining this faith, the venerable Father Gregory so earnestly
          strove against the rising heresy, and with the help of the most
          pious emperor, Tiberius Constantine,<a href="#note_151" id="noteref_151" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">151</span></span></a> so
          fully suppressed it, that none has been since found to revive
          it.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He likewise
          composed another notable book, the <span class="tei tei-q">“Liber
          Pastoralis,”</span> wherein he clearly showed what sort of persons
          ought to be preferred to rule the Church; how such rulers ought to
          live; with how much discrimination they ought to instruct the
          different classes of their hearers, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page079">[pg 079]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg079"/> and how seriously to reflect every day on
          their own frailty. He also wrote forty homilies on the Gospel,
          which he divided equally into two volumes; and composed four books
          of Dialogues, in which, at the request of his deacon, Peter, he
          recounted the virtues of the more renowned saints of Italy, whom he
          had either known or heard of, as a pattern of life for posterity;
          to the end that, as he taught in his books of Expositions what
          virtues men ought to strive after, so by describing the miracles of
          saints, he might make known the glory of those virtues. Further, in
          twenty-two homilies, he showed how much light is latent in the
          first and last parts of the prophet Ezekiel, which seemed the most
          obscure. Besides which, he wrote the <span class="tei tei-q">“Book
          of Answers,”</span><a href="#note_152" id="noteref_152" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">152</span></span></a> to
          the questions of the holy Augustine, the first bishop of the
          English nation, as we have shown above, inserting the same book
          entire in this history; and the useful little <span class="tei tei-q">“Synodical Book,”</span><a href="#note_153" id="noteref_153" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">153</span></span></a> which
          he composed with the bishops of Italy on necessary matters of the
          Church; as well as private letters to certain persons. And it is
          the more wonderful that he could write so many lengthy works,
          seeing that almost all the time of his youth, to use his own words,
          he was frequently tormented with internal pain, constantly
          enfeebled by the weakness of his digestion, and oppressed by a low
          but persistent fever. But in all these troubles, forasmuch as he
          carefully reflected that, as the Scripture testifies,<a href="#note_154" id="noteref_154" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">154</span></span></a>
<span class="tei tei-q">“He scourgeth every son whom He
          receiveth,”</span> the more severely he suffered under those
          present evils, the more he assured himself of his eternal hope.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Thus much may be
          said of his immortal genius, which could not be crushed by such
          severe bodily pains. Other popes applied themselves to building
          churches or adorning them with gold and silver, but Gregory was
          wholly intent upon gaining souls. Whatsoever money he had,
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page080">[pg 080]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg080"/> he took care to
          distribute diligently and give to the poor, that his righteousness
          might endure for ever, and his horn be exalted with honour; so that
          the words of the blessed Job might be truly said of him,<a href="#note_155" id="noteref_155" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">155</span></span></a>
<span class="tei tei-q">“When the ear heard me, then it blessed me;
          and when the eye saw me, it gave witness to me: because I delivered
          the poor that cried, and the fatherless, and him that had none to
          help him. The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon
          me, and I caused the widow's heart to sing for joy. I put on
          righteousness, and it clothed me; my judgement was as a robe and a
          diadem. I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I to the lame. I was
          a father to the poor; and the cause which I knew not, I searched
          out. And I brake the jaws of the wicked, and plucked the spoil out
          of his teeth.”</span> And a little after: <span class="tei tei-q">“If I have withheld,”</span> says he, <span class="tei tei-q">“the poor from their desire; or have caused the eyes of
          the widow to fail; or have eaten my morsel myself alone, and the
          fatherless hath not eaten thereof: (for from my youth compassion
          grew up with me, and from my mother's womb it came forth with
          me.”</span><a href="#note_156" id="noteref_156" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">156</span></span></a>)</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">To his works of
          piety and righteousness this also may be added, that he saved our
          nation, by the preachers he sent hither, from the teeth of the old
          enemy, and made it partaker of eternal liberty. Rejoicing in the
          faith and salvation of our race, and worthily commending it with
          praise, he says, in his exposition of the blessed Job, <span class="tei tei-q">“Behold, the tongue of Britain, which only knew how to
          utter barbarous cries, has long since begun to raise the Hebrew
          Hallelujah to the praise of God! Behold, the once swelling ocean
          now serves prostrate at the feet of the saints; and its wild
          upheavals, which earthly princes could not subdue with the sword,
          are now, through the fear of God, bound by the lips of priests with
          words alone; and the heathen that stood not in awe of troops of
          warriors, now believes and fears the tongues of the humble! For he
          has received a message from on high <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page081">[pg 081]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg081"/> and mighty works are revealed; the strength
          of the knowledge of God is given him, and restrained by the fear of
          the Lord, he dreads to do evil, and with all his heart desires to
          attain to everlasting grace.”</span> In which words the blessed
          Gregory shows us this also, that St. Augustine and his companions
          brought the English to receive the truth, not only by the preaching
          of words, but also by showing forth heavenly signs.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The blessed Pope
          Gregory, among other things, caused Masses to be celebrated in the
          churches of the holy Apostles, Peter and Paul, over their bodies.
          And in the celebration of Masses, he added three petitions of the
          utmost perfection: <span class="tei tei-q">“And dispose our days in
          thy peace, and bid us to be preserved from eternal damnation, and
          to be numbered in the flock of thine elect.”</span><a href="#note_157" id="noteref_157" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">157</span></span></a></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He governed the
          Church in the days of the Emperors Mauritius and Phocas, and
          passing out of this life in the second year of the same
          Phocas,<a href="#note_158" id="noteref_158" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">158</span></span></a> he
          departed to the true life which is in Heaven. His body was buried
          in the church of the blessed Apostle Peter before the sacristy, on
          the 12th day of March, to rise one day in the same body in glory
          with the rest of the holy pastors of the Church. On his tomb was
          written this epitaph:</p>
<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
<span style="font-size: 90%">Receive, O Earth, his body taken from
          thine own; thou canst restore it, when God calls to life. His
          spirit rises to the stars; the claims of death shall not avail
          against him, for death itself is but the way to new life. In this
          tomb are laid the limbs of a great pontiff, who yet lives for ever
          in all places in countless deeds of mercy. Hunger and cold he
          overcame with food and raiment, and shielded souls from the enemy
          by his holy teaching. And whatsoever he taught in word, that he
          fulfilled in deed, that he might be a pattern, even as he spake
          words of mystic meaning. By his</span> <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page082">[pg 082]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg082"/><span style="font-size: 90%">guiding love he
            brought the Angles to Christ, gaining armies for the Faith from a
            new people. This was thy toil, thy task, thy care, thy aim as
            shepherd, to offer to thy Lord abundant increase of the flock.
            So, Consul of God, rejoice in this thy triumph, for now thou hast
            the reward of thy works for evermore.</span>
</div>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Nor must we pass
          by in silence the story of the blessed Gregory, handed down to us
          by the tradition of our ancestors, which explains his earnest care
          for the salvation of our nation. It is said that one day, when some
          merchants had lately arrived at Rome, many things were exposed for
          sale in the market place, and much people resorted thither to buy:
          Gregory himself went with the rest, and saw among other wares some
          boys put up for sale, of fair complexion, with pleasing
          countenances, and very beautiful hair. When he beheld them, he
          asked, it is said, from what region or country they were brought?
          and was told, from the island of Britain, and that the inhabitants
          were like that in appearance. He again inquired whether those
          islanders were Christians, or still involved in the errors of
          paganism, and was informed that they were pagans. Then fetching a
          deep sigh from the bottom of his heart, <span class="tei tei-q">“Alas! what pity,”</span> said he, <span class="tei tei-q">“that the author of darkness should own men of such
          fair countenances; and that with such grace of outward form, their
          minds should be void of inward grace.”</span> He therefore again
          asked, what was the name of that nation? and was answered, that
          they were called Angles. <span class="tei tei-q">“Right,”</span>
          said he, <span class="tei tei-q">“for they have an angelic face,
          and it is meet that such should be co-heirs with the Angels in
          heaven. What is the name of the province from which they are
          brought?”</span> It was replied, that the natives of that province
          were called Deiri.<a href="#note_159" id="noteref_159" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">159</span></span></a>
<span class="tei tei-q">“Truly are they <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">De
          ira</span></span>,”</span> said he, <span class="tei tei-q">“saved
          from wrath, and called to the mercy of Christ. How is the king of
          that province <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page083">[pg
          083]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg083"/>
          called?”</span> They told him his name was Aelli;<a href="#note_160" id="noteref_160" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">160</span></span></a> and
          he, playing upon the name, said, <span class="tei tei-q">“Allelujah, the praise of God the Creator must be sung
          in those parts.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Then he went to
          the bishop of the Roman Apostolic see<a href="#note_161" id="noteref_161" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">161</span></span></a> (for
          he was not himself then made pope), and entreated him to send some
          ministers of the Word into Britain to the nation of the English,
          that it might be converted to Christ by them; declaring himself
          ready to carry out that work with the help of God, if the Apostolic
          Pope should think fit to have it done. But not being then able to
          perform this task, because, though the Pope was willing to grant
          his request, yet the citizens of Rome could not be brought to
          consent that he should depart so far from the city, as soon as he
          was himself made Pope, he carried out the long-desired work,
          sending, indeed, other preachers, but himself by his exhortations
          and prayers helping the preaching to bear fruit. This account,
          which we have received from a past generation, we have thought fit
          to insert in our Ecclesiastical History.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc85"/> <a id="pdf86"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_II_Chap_II"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. II. How Augustine admonished
          the bishops of the Britons on behalf of Catholic peace, and to that
          end wrought a heavenly miracle in their presence; and of the
          vengeance that pursued them for their contempt.
          [</span><span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-style: italic">Circ.</span></span>
<span style="font-size: 144%">603</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the meantime,
          Augustine, with the help of King Ethelbert, drew together to a
          conference the bishops and doctors of the nearest province of the
          Britons, at a place <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page084">[pg
          084]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg084"/>
          which is to this day called, in the English language, Augustine's
          Ác, that is, Augustine's Oak,<a href="#note_162" id="noteref_162" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">162</span></span></a> on
          the borders of the Hwiccas<a href="#note_163" id="noteref_163" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">163</span></span></a> and
          West Saxons; and began by brotherly admonitions to persuade them to
          preserve Catholic peace with him, and undertake the common labour
          of preaching the Gospel to the heathen for the Lord's sake. For
          they did not keep Easter Sunday at the proper time, but from the
          fourteenth to the twentieth moon; which computation is contained in
          a cycle of eighty-four years.<a href="#note_164" id="noteref_164" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">164</span></span></a>
          Besides, they did many other things <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page085">[pg 085]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg085"/> which were opposed to the unity of the
          church.<a href="#note_165" id="noteref_165" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">165</span></span></a> When,
          after a long disputation, they did not comply with the entreaties,
          exhortations, or rebukes of Augustine and his companions, but
          preferred their own traditions before all the Churches which are
          united in Christ throughout the world, the holy father, Augustine,
          put an end to this troublesome and tedious contention, saying,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Let us entreat God, who maketh men to be
          of one mind in His Father's house, to vouchsafe, by signs from
          Heaven, to declare to us which tradition is to be followed; and by
          what path we are to strive to enter His kingdom. Let some sick man
          be brought, and let the faith and practice of him, by whose prayers
          he shall be healed, be looked upon as hallowed in God's sight and
          such as should be adopted by all.”</span> His adversaries
          unwillingly consenting, a blind man of the English race was
          brought, who having been presented to the British bishops, found no
          benefit or healing from their ministry; at length, Augustine,
          compelled by strict necessity, bowed his knees to the Father of our
          Lord Jesus Christ, praying that He would restore his lost sight to
          the blind man, and by the bodily enlightenment of one kindle the
          grace of spiritual light in the hearts of many of the faithful.
          Immediately the blind man received sight, and Augustine was
          proclaimed by all to be a true herald of the light from Heaven. The
          Britons then confessed that they perceived that it was the
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page086">[pg 086]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg086"/> true way of
          righteousness which Augustine taught; but that they could not
          depart from their ancient customs without the consent and sanction
          of their people. They therefore desired that a second time a synod
          might be appointed, at which more of their number should be
          present.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">This being
          decreed, there came, it is said, seven bishops of the
          Britons,<a href="#note_166" id="noteref_166" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">166</span></span></a> and
          many men of great learning, particularly from their most celebrated
          monastery, which is called, in the English tongue,
          Bancornaburg,<a href="#note_167" id="noteref_167" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">167</span></span></a> and
          over which the Abbot Dinoot<a href="#note_168" id="noteref_168" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">168</span></span></a> is
          said to have presided at that time. They that were to go to the
          aforesaid council, betook themselves first to a certain holy and
          discreet man, who was wont to lead the life of a hermit among them,
          to consult with him, whether they ought, at the preaching of
          Augustine, to forsake their traditions. He answered, <span class="tei tei-q">“If he is a man of God, follow
          him.”</span>—<span class="tei tei-q">“How shall we know
          that?”</span> said they. He replied, <span class="tei tei-q">“Our
          Lord saith, Take My yoke upon you, and learn of Me, for I am meek
          and lowly in heart; if therefore, Augustine is meek and lowly of
          heart, it is to be believed that he bears the yoke of Christ
          himself, and offers it to you to bear. But, if he is harsh and
          proud, it is plain that he is not of God, nor are we to regard his
          words.”</span> They said again, <span class="tei tei-q">“And how
          shall we discern even this?”</span>—<span class="tei tei-q">“Do you
          contrive,”</span> said the anchorite, <span class="tei tei-q">“that
          he first arrive with his company at the place where the synod is to
          be held; and if at your approach he rises up to you, hear him
          submissively, being assured that he is the servant of Christ; but
          if he despises you, and does not rise up to you, whereas you are
          more in number, let him also be despised by
          you.”</span></p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page087">[pg
          087]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg087"/>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">They did as he
          directed; and it happened, that as they approached, Augustine was
          sitting on a chair. When they perceived it, they were angry, and
          charging him with pride, set themselves to contradict all he said.
          He said to them, <span class="tei tei-q">“Many things ye do which
          are contrary to our custom, or rather the custom of the universal
          Church, and yet, if you will comply with me in these three matters,
          to wit, to keep Easter at the due time; to fulfil the ministry of
          Baptism, by which we are born again to God, according to the custom
          of the holy Roman Apostolic Church;<a href="#note_169" id="noteref_169" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">169</span></span></a> and
          to join with us in preaching the Word of God to the English nation,
          we will gladly suffer all the other things you do, though contrary
          to our customs.”</span> They answered that they would do none of
          those things, nor receive him as their archbishop; for they said
          among themselves, <span class="tei tei-q">“if he would not rise up
          to us now, how much more will he despise us, as of no account, if
          we begin to be under his subjection?”</span> Then the man of God,
          Augustine, is said to have threatened them, that if they would not
          accept peace with their brethren, they should have war from their
          enemies; and, if they would not preach the way of life to the
          English nation, they should suffer at their hands the vengeance of
          death. All which, through the dispensation of the Divine judgement,
          fell out exactly as he had predicted.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">For afterwards
          the warlike king of the English, Ethelfrid,<a href="#note_170" id="noteref_170" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">170</span></span></a> of
          whom we have spoken, having raised a mighty army, made a very great
          slaughter of that heretical nation, at the city of Legions,<a href="#note_171" id="noteref_171" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">171</span></span></a> which
          by the English is <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page088">[pg
          088]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg088"/>
          called Legacaestir, but by the Britons more rightly Carlegion.
          Being about to give battle, he observed their priests, who were
          come together to offer up their prayers to God for the combatants,
          standing apart in a place of greater safety; he inquired who they
          were, and what they came together to do in that place. Most of them
          were of the monastery of Bangor,<a href="#note_172" id="noteref_172" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">172</span></span></a> in
          which, it is said, there was so great a number of monks, that the
          monastery being divided into seven parts, with a superior set over
          each, none of those parts contained less than three hundred men,
          who all lived by the labour of their hands. Many of these, having
          observed a fast of three days, had come together along with others
          to pray at the aforesaid battle, having one Brocmail<a href="#note_173" id="noteref_173" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">173</span></span></a> for
          their protector, to defend them, whilst they were intent upon their
          prayers, against the swords of the barbarians. King Ethelfrid being
          informed of the occasion of their coming, said, <span class="tei tei-q">“If then they cry to their God against us, in truth,
          though they do not bear arms, yet they fight against us, because
          they assail us with their curses.”</span> He, therefore, commanded
          them to be attacked first, and then destroyed the rest of the
          impious army, not without great loss of his own forces. About
          twelve hundred of those that came to pray are said to have been
          killed, and only fifty to have escaped by flight. Brocmail, turning
          his back with his men, at the first approach of the enemy, left
          those whom he ought to have defended unarmed and exposed to the
          swords of the assailants. Thus was fulfilled the prophecy of the
          holy Bishop Augustine, though he himself had been long before taken
          up into the heavenly kingdom, that the heretics should feel the
          vengeance of temporal death also, because they had despised the
          offer of eternal salvation.</p>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page089">[pg 089]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg089"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc87"/> <a id="pdf88"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_II_Chap_III"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. III. How St. Augustine made
          Mellitus and Justus bishops; and of his death. [604</span>
<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year of
          our Lord 604, Augustine, Archbishop of Britain, ordained two
          bishops, to wit, Mellitus and Justus;<a href="#note_174" id="noteref_174" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">174</span></span></a>
          Mellitus to preach to the province of the East-Saxons, who are
          divided from Kent by the river Thames, and border on the Eastern
          sea. Their metropolis is the city of London, which is situated on
          the bank of the aforesaid river, and is the mart of many nations
          resorting to it by sea and land. At that time, Sabert, nephew to
          Ethelbert through his sister Ricula, reigned over the nation,
          though he was under subjection to Ethelbert, who, as has been said
          above, had command over all the nations of the English as far as
          the river Humber. But when this province also received the word of
          truth, by the preaching of Mellitus, King Ethelbert built the
          church of St. Paul the Apostle,<a href="#note_175" id="noteref_175" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">175</span></span></a> in
          the city of London, where he and his successors should have their
          episcopal see. As for Justus, Augustine ordained him bishop in
          Kent, at the city of Dorubrevis, which the English call
          Hrofaescaestrae,<a href="#note_176" id="noteref_176" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">176</span></span></a> from
          one that was formerly the chief man of it, called Hrof. It is about
          twenty-four miles distant from the city of Canterbury to the
          westward, and in it King Ethelbert dedicated a church to the
          blessed Apostle Andrew,<a href="#note_177" id="noteref_177" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">177</span></span></a> and
          bestowed many gifts on the bishops of both those churches, as well
          as on the Bishop of Canterbury, adding lands and possessions for
          the use of those who were associated with the bishops.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">After this, the
          beloved of God, our father Augustine, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page090">[pg 090]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg090"/> died,<a href="#note_178" id="noteref_178" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">178</span></span></a> and
          his body was laid outside, close by the church of the blessed
          Apostles, Peter and Paul, above spoken of, because it was not yet
          finished, nor consecrated, but as soon as it was consecrated,<a href="#note_179" id="noteref_179" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">179</span></span></a> the
          body was brought in, and fittingly buried in the north chapel<a href="#note_180" id="noteref_180" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">180</span></span></a>
          thereof; wherein also were interred the bodies of all the
          succeeding archbishops, except two only, Theodore and Bertwald,
          whose bodies are in the church itself, because the aforesaid chapel
          could contain no more.<a href="#note_181" id="noteref_181" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">181</span></span></a>
          Almost in the midst of this chapel is an altar dedicated in honour
          of the blessed Pope Gregory, at which every Saturday memorial
          Masses are celebrated for the archbishops by a priest of that
          place. On the tomb of Augustine is inscribed this epitaph:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Here rests the Lord Augustine, first Archbishop of
          Canterbury, who, being of old sent hither by the blessed Gregory,
          Bishop of the city of Rome, and supported by God in the working of
          miracles, led King Ethelbert and his nation from the worship of
          idols to the faith of Christ, and having ended the days of his
          office in peace, died the 26th day of May, in the reign of the same
          king.”</span></p>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page091">[pg 091]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg091"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc89"/> <a id="pdf90"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_II_Chap_IV"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. IV. How Laurentius and his
          bishops admonished the Scots to observe the unity of the Holy
          Church, particularly in keeping of Easter; and how Mellitus went to
          Rome.</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Laurentius<a href="#note_182" id="noteref_182" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">182</span></span></a>
          succeeded Augustine in the bishopric, having been ordained thereto
          by the latter, in his lifetime, lest, upon his death, the Church,
          as yet in so unsettled a state, might begin to falter, if it should
          be destitute of a pastor, though but for one hour. Wherein he also
          followed the example of the first pastor of the Church, that is, of
          the most blessed Peter, chief of the Apostles, who, having founded
          the Church of Christ at Rome, is said to have consecrated Clement
          to help him in preaching the Gospel, and at the same time to be his
          successor. Laurentius, being advanced to the rank of archbishop,
          laboured indefatigably, both by frequent words of holy exhortation
          and constant example of good works to strengthen the foundations of
          the Church, which had been so nobly laid, and to carry it on to the
          fitting height of perfection. In short, he not only took charge of
          the new Church formed among the English, but endeavoured also to
          bestow his pastoral care upon the tribes of the ancient inhabitants
          of Britain, as also of the Scots, who inhabit the island of
          Ireland,<a href="#note_183" id="noteref_183" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">183</span></span></a> which
          is next to Britain. For when he understood that the life and
          profession of the Scots in their aforesaid country, as well as of
          the Britons in Britain, was not truly in accordance with the
          practice of the Church in many matters, especially that they did
          not celebrate the festival of Easter at the due time, but thought
          that the day of the Resurrection of our Lord ought, as has been
          said above, to be observed between the 14th and 20th of the moon;
          he wrote, jointly with his fellow bishops, a hortatory epistle,
          entreating and conjuring them to keep the unity of peace and
          Catholic observance with the Church of <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page092">[pg 092]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg092"/> Christ spread throughout the world. The
          beginning of which epistle is as follows:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">To our most dear brethren, the Lords Bishops
          and Abbots throughout all the country of the Scots,</span><a href="#note_184" id="noteref_184" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; font-style: italic; vertical-align: super">184</span></span></a>
<span style="font-style: italic">Laurentius, Mellitus, and Justus,
          Bishops, servants of the servants of God.</span></span> When the
          Apostolic see, according to the universal custom which it has
          followed elsewhere, sent us to these western parts to preach to
          pagan nations, and it was our lot to come into this island, which
          is called Britain, before we knew them, we held both the Britons
          and Scots in great esteem for sanctity, believing that they walked
          according to the custom of the universal Church; but becoming
          acquainted with the Britons, we thought that the Scots had been
          better. Now we have learnt from Bishop Dagan,<a href="#note_185" id="noteref_185" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">185</span></span></a> who
          came into this aforesaid island, and the Abbot Columban,<a href="#note_186" id="noteref_186" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">186</span></span></a> in
          Gaul, that the Scots in no way differ from the Britons in their
          walk; for when Bishop Dagan came to us, not only did he refuse to
          eat at the same table, but even to eat in the same house where we
          were entertained.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Also Laurentius
          with his fellow bishops wrote a letter to the bishops of the
          Britons, suitable to his degree, by which he endeavoured to confirm
          them in Catholic unity; but what he gained by so doing the present
          times still show.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">About this time,
          Mellitus, bishop of London, went to Rome, to confer with the
          Apostolic Pope Boniface about the necessary affairs of the English
          Church. And the same most reverend pope, assembling a synod of the
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page093">[pg 093]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg093"/> bishops of
          Italy,<a href="#note_187" id="noteref_187" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">187</span></span></a> to
          prescribe rules for the life and peace of the monks, Mellitus also
          sat among them, in the eighth year of the reign of the Emperor
          Phocas, the thirteenth indiction, on the 27th of February,<a href="#note_188" id="noteref_188" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">188</span></span></a> to
          the end that he also might sign and confirm by his authority
          whatsoever should be regularly decreed, and on his return into
          Britain might carry the decrees to the Churches of the English, to
          be committed to them and observed; together with letters which the
          same pope sent to the beloved of God, Archbishop Laurentius, and to
          all the clergy; as likewise to King Ethelbert and the English
          nation. This pope was Boniface, the fourth after the blessed
          Gregory, bishop of the city of Rome. He obtained for the Church of
          Christ from the Emperor Phocas the gift of the temple at Rome
          called by the ancients Pantheon, as representing all the gods;
          wherein he, having purified it from all defilement, dedicated a
          church to the holy Mother of God, and to all Christ's martyrs, to
          the end that, the company of devils being expelled, the blessed
          company of the saints might have therein a perpetual
          memorial.<a href="#note_189" id="noteref_189" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">189</span></span></a></p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc91"/> <a id="pdf92"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_II_Chap_V"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. V. How, after the death of the
          kings Ethelbert and Sabert, their successors restored idolatry; for
          which reason, both Mellitus and Justus departed out of Britain.
          [616</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year of
          our Lord 616, which is the twenty-first year after Augustine and
          his company were sent to preach to the English nation, Ethelbert,
          king of Kent, having most gloriously governed his temporal kingdom
          fifty-six years, entered into the eternal joys of the kingdom
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page094">[pg 094]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg094"/> of Heaven. He was
          the third of the English kings who ruled over all the southern
          provinces that are divided from the northern by the river Humber
          and the borders contiguous to it;<a href="#note_190" id="noteref_190" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">190</span></span></a> but
          the first of all that ascended to the heavenly kingdom. The first
          who had the like sovereignty was Aelli, king of the South-Saxons;
          the second, Caelin, king of the West-Saxons, who, in their own
          language, is called Ceaulin; the third, as has been said, was
          Ethelbert, king of Kent; the fourth was Redwald, king of the
          East-Angles, who, even in the life-time of Ethelbert, had been
          acquiring the leadership for his own race. The fifth was Edwin,
          king of the Northumbrian nation, that is, of those who live in the
          district to the north of the river Humber; his power was greater;
          he had the overlordship over all the nations who inhabit Britain,
          both English and British, except only the people of Kent; and he
          reduced also under the dominion of the English, the Mevanian
          Islands<a href="#note_191" id="noteref_191" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">191</span></span></a> of
          the Britons, lying between Ireland and Britain; the sixth was
          Oswald, the most Christian king of the Northumbrians, whose kingdom
          was within the same bounds; the seventh, his brother Oswy, ruled
          over a kingdom of like extent for a time, and for the most part
          subdued and made tributary the nations of the Picts and Scots, who
          occupy the northern parts of Britain: but of that hereafter.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">King Ethelbert
          died on the 24th day of the month of February, twenty-one years
          after he had received the faith,<a href="#note_192" id="noteref_192" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">192</span></span></a> and
          was buried in St. Martin's chapel within the church of the blessed
          Apostles Peter and Paul, where also lies his queen, Bertha. Among
          other benefits which he <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page095">[pg
          095]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg095"/>
          conferred upon his nation in his care for them, he established,
          with the help of his council of wise men,<a href="#note_193" id="noteref_193" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">193</span></span></a>
          judicial decisions, after the Roman model; which are written in the
          language of the English, and are still kept and observed by them.
          Among which, he set down first what satisfaction should be given by
          any one who should steal anything belonging to the Church, the
          bishop, or the other clergy, for he was resolved to give protection
          to those whom he had received along with their doctrine.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">This Ethelbert
          was the son of Irminric, whose father was Octa, whose father was
          Oeric, surnamed Oisc, from whom the kings of Kent are wont to be
          called Oiscings.<a href="#note_194" id="noteref_194" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">194</span></span></a> His
          father was Hengist, who, being invited by Vortigern, first came
          into Britain, with his son Oisc, as has been said above.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But after the
          death of Ethelbert, the accession of his son Eadbald proved very
          harmful to the still tender growth of the new Church; for he not
          only refused to accept the faith of Christ, but was also defiled
          with such fornication, as the Apostle testifies, as is not so much
          as named among the Gentiles, that one should have his father's
          wife.<a href="#note_195" id="noteref_195" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">195</span></span></a> By
          both which crimes he gave occasion to those to return to their
          former uncleanness, who, under his father, had, either for favour
          or fear of the king, submitted to the laws of the faith and of a
          pure life. Nor did the unbelieving king escape without the scourge
          of Divine severity in chastisement and correction; for he was
          troubled with frequent fits of madness, and possessed by an unclean
          spirit. The storm of this disturbance was increased by the death of
          Sabert, king of the East Saxons, who departing to the heavenly
          kingdom, left three sons, still pagans, to inherit his temporal
          crown. They immediately began openly to give themselves up to
          idolatry, which, during their father's lifetime, they had seemed
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page096">[pg 096]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg096"/> somewhat to abandon,
          and they granted free licence to their subjects to serve idols. And
          when they saw the bishop, whilst celebrating Mass in the church,
          give the Eucharist to the people, filled, as they were, with folly
          and ignorance, they said to him, as is commonly reported,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Why do you not give us also that white
          bread, which you used to give to our father Saba (for so they were
          wont to call him), and which you still continue to give to the
          people in the church?”</span> To whom he answered, <span class="tei tei-q">“If you will be washed in that font of salvation, in
          which your father was washed, you may also partake of the holy
          Bread of which he partook; but if you despise the laver of life,
          you can in no wise receive the Bread of life.”</span> They replied,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“We will not enter into that font, because
          we know that we do not stand in need of it, and yet we will be
          refreshed by that bread.”</span> And being often earnestly
          admonished by him, that this could by no means be done, nor would
          any one be admitted to partake of the sacred Oblation without the
          holy cleansing, at last, they said, filled with rage, <span class="tei tei-q">“If you will not comply with us in so small a matter as
          that which we require, you shall not stay in our province.”</span>
          And they drove him out and bade him and his company depart from
          their kingdom. Being driven thence, he came into Kent, to take
          counsel with his fellow bishops, Laurentius and Justus, and learn
          what was to be done in that case; and with one consent they
          determined that it was better for them all to return to their own
          country, where they might serve God in freedom of mind, than to
          continue to no purpose among barbarians, who had revolted from the
          faith. Mellitus and Justus accordingly went away first, and
          withdrew into the parts of Gaul, intending there to await the
          event. But the kings, who had driven from them the herald of the
          truth, did not continue long unpunished in their worship of devils.
          For marching out to battle against the nation of the Gewissi,<a href="#note_196" id="noteref_196" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">196</span></span></a> they
          were all slain with their army. Nevertheless, the people,
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page097">[pg 097]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg097"/> having been once
          turned to wickedness, though the authors of it were destroyed,
          would not be corrected, nor return to the unity of faith and
          charity which is in Christ.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc93"/> <a id="pdf94"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_II_Chap_VI"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. VI. How Laurentius, being
          reproved by the Apostle Peter, converted King Eadbald to Christ;
          and how the king soon recalled Mellitus and Justus to preach the
          Word. [617-618</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Laurentius,
          being about to follow Mellitus and Justus, and to quit Britain,
          ordered his bed to be laid that night in the church of the blessed
          Apostles, Peter and Paul, which has been often mentioned before;
          wherein having laid himself to rest, after he had with tears poured
          forth many prayers to God for the state of the Church, he fell
          asleep; in the dead of night, the blessed chief of the Apostles
          appeared to him, and scourging him grievously a long time, asked of
          him with apostolic severity, why he was forsaking the flock which
          he had committed to him? or to what shepherd he was leaving, by his
          flight, Christ's sheep that were in the midst of wolves?
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Hast thou,”</span> he said, <span class="tei tei-q">“forgotten my example, who, for the sake of those
          little ones, whom Christ commended to me in token of His affection,
          underwent at the hands of infidels and enemies of Christ, bonds,
          stripes, imprisonment, afflictions, and lastly, death itself, even
          the death of the cross, that I might at last be crowned with
          Him?”</span> Laurentius, the servant of Christ, roused by the
          scourging of the blessed Peter and his words of exhortation, went
          to the king as soon as morning broke, and laying aside his garment,
          showed the scars of the stripes which he had received. The king,
          astonished, asked who had presumed to inflict such stripes on so
          great a man. And when he heard that for the sake of his salvation
          the bishop had suffered these cruel blows at the hands of the
          Apostle of Christ, he was greatly afraid; and abjuring the worship
          of idols, and renouncing his unlawful marriage, he received the
          faith of Christ, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page098">[pg
          098]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg098"/>
          and being baptized, promoted and supported the interests of the
          Church to the utmost of his power.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He also sent
          over into Gaul, and recalled Mellitus and Justus, and bade them
          return to govern their churches in freedom. They came back one year
          after their departure, and Justus returned to the city of
          Rochester, where he had before presided; but the people of London
          would not receive Bishop Mellitus, choosing rather to be under
          their idolatrous high priests; for King Eadbald had not so much
          authority in the kingdom as his father, and was not able to restore
          the bishop to his church against the will and consent of the
          pagans. But he and his nation, after his conversion to the Lord,
          sought to obey the commandments of God. Lastly, he built the church
          of the holy Mother of God,<a href="#note_197" id="noteref_197" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">197</span></span></a> in
          the monastery of the most blessed chief of the Apostles, which was
          afterwards consecrated by Archbishop Mellitus.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc95"/> <a id="pdf96"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_II_Chap_VII"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. VII. How Bishop Mellitus by
          prayer quenched a fire in his city. [619</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In this king's
          reign, the blessed Archbishop Laurentius was taken up to the
          heavenly kingdom: he was buried in the church and monastery of the
          holy Apostle Peter, close by his predecessor Augustine, on the 2nd
          day of the month of February.<a href="#note_198" id="noteref_198" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">198</span></span></a>
          Mellitus, who was bishop of London, succeeded to the see of
          Canterbury, being the third archbishop from Augustine; Justus, who
          was still living, governed the church of Rochester. These ruled the
          Church of the English with much care and industry, and received
          letters of exhortation from Boniface,<a href="#note_199" id="noteref_199" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">199</span></span></a>
          bishop of the Roman Apostolic see, who presided over the Church
          after Deusdedit, in the year of our Lord 619. Mellitus laboured
          under the bodily infirmity of gout, but his mind was sound and
          active, cheerfully passing over all earthly things, and always
          aspiring to love, seek, and attain to <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page099">[pg 099]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg099"/> those which are celestial. He was noble by
          birth, but still nobler by the elevation of his mind.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In short, that I
          may give one instance of his power, from which the rest may be
          inferred, it happened once that the city of Canterbury, being set
          on fire through carelessness, was in danger of being consumed by
          the spreading conflagration; water was thrown on the fire in vain;
          a considerable part of the city was already destroyed, and the
          fierce flames were advancing towards the bishop's abode, when he,
          trusting in God, where human help failed, ordered himself to be
          carried towards the raging masses of fire which were spreading on
          every side. The church of the four crowned Martyrs<a href="#note_200" id="noteref_200" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">200</span></span></a> was
          in the place where the fire raged most fiercely. The bishop, being
          carried thither by his servants, weak as he was, set about averting
          by prayer the danger which the strong hands of active men had not
          been able to overcome with all their exertions. Immediately the
          wind, which blowing from the south had spread the conflagration
          throughout the city, veered to the north, and thus prevented the
          destruction of those places that had been exposed to its full
          violence, then it ceased entirely and there was a calm, while the
          flames likewise sank and were extinguished. And because the man of
          God burned with the fire of divine love, and was wont to drive away
          the storms of the powers of the air, by his frequent prayers and at
          his bidding, from doing harm to himself, or his people, it was meet
          that he should be allowed to prevail over the winds and flames of
          this world, and to obtain that they should not injure him or
          his.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">This archbishop
          also, having ruled the church five years, departed to heaven in the
          reign of King Eadbald, and was buried with his fathers in the
          monastery and church, which we have so often mentioned, of the most
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page100">[pg 100]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg100"/> blessed chief of the
          Apostles, in the year of our Lord 624, on the 24th day of
          April.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc97"/> <a id="pdf98"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_II_Chap_VIII"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. VIII. How Pope Boniface sent
          the Pall and a letter to Justus, successor to Mellitus. [624</span>
<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Justus, bishop
          of the church of Rochester, immediately succeeded Mellitus in the
          archbishopric. He consecrated Romanus bishop of that see in his own
          stead, having obtained authority to ordain bishops from Pope
          Boniface, whom we mentioned above as successor to Deusdedit: of
          which licence this is the form:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Boniface, to his most beloved brother
          Justus.</span></span> We have learnt not only from the contents of
          your letter addressed to us, but from the fulfilment granted to
          your work, how faithfully and vigilantly you have laboured, my
          brother, for the Gospel of Christ; for Almighty God has not
          forsaken either the mystery of His Name, or the fruit of your
          labours, having Himself faithfully promised to the preachers of the
          Gospel, <span class="tei tei-q">‘Lo! I am with you alway, even unto
          the end of the world’</span>;<a href="#note_201" id="noteref_201" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">201</span></span></a> which
          promise His mercy has particularly manifested in this ministry
          imposed upon you, opening the hearts of the nations to receive the
          wondrous mystery of your preaching. For He has blessed with a rich
          reward your Eminence's acceptable course, by the support of His
          loving kindness; granting a plentiful increase to your labours in
          the faithful management of the talents committed to you, and
          bestowing it on that which you might confirm to many
          generations.<a href="#note_202" id="noteref_202" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">202</span></span></a> This
          is conferred on you by that recompense whereby, constantly
          persevering in the ministry imposed upon you, you have awaited with
          praiseworthy patience the redemption of that nation, and that they
          might profit by your merits, salvation has been bestowed
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page101">[pg 101]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg101"/> on them. For our
          Lord Himself says, <span class="tei tei-q">‘He that endureth to the
          end shall be saved.’</span><a href="#note_203" id="noteref_203" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">203</span></span></a> You
          are, therefore, saved by the hope of patience, and the virtue of
          endurance, to the end that the hearts of unbelievers, being
          cleansed from their natural disease of superstition, might obtain
          the mercy of their Saviour: for having received letters from our
          son Adulwald,<a href="#note_204" id="noteref_204" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">204</span></span></a> we
          perceive with how much knowledge of the Sacred Word you, my
          brother, have brought his mind to the belief in true conversion and
          the certainty of the faith. Therefore, firmly confiding in the
          long-suffering of the Divine clemency, we believe that, through the
          ministry of your preaching, there will ensue most full salvation
          not only of the nations subject to him, but also of their
          neighbours; to the end, that as it is written, the recompense of a
          perfect work may be conferred on you by the Lord, the Rewarder of
          all the just; and that the universal confession of all nations,
          having received the mystery of the Christian faith, may declare,
          that in truth <span class="tei tei-q">‘Their sound is gone out into
          all the earth, and their words unto the end of the
          world.’</span><a href="#note_205" id="noteref_205" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">205</span></span></a></span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“We have also, my brother, moved by the warmth of our
          goodwill, sent you by the bearer of these presents, the pall,
          giving you authority to use it only in the celebration of the
          Sacred Mysteries; granting to you likewise to ordain bishops when
          there shall be occasion, through the Lord's mercy; that so the
          Gospel of Christ, by the preaching of many, may be spread abroad in
          all the nations that are not yet converted. You must, therefore,
          endeavour, my brother, to preserve with unblemished sincerity of
          mind that which you have received through the kindness of the
          Apostolic see, bearing in mind what it is that is represented by
          the honourable vestment which you have obtained to be borne on your
          shoulders. And imploring the Divine mercy, study to show yourself
          such that you may present before the tribunal of the Supreme Judge
          that is to come, the rewards of the favour granted to you, not with
          guiltiness, but with the benefit of souls.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“God preserve you in safety, most dear
          brother!”</span></p>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page102">[pg 102]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg102"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc99"/> <a id="pdf100"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_II_Chap_IX"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. IX. Of the reign of King Edwin,
          and how Paulinus, coming to preach the Gospel, first converted his
          daughter and others to the mysteries of the faith of Christ.
          [625-626</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At this time the
          nation of the Northumbrians, that is, the English tribe dwelling on
          the north side of the river Humber, with their king, Edwin,<a href="#note_206" id="noteref_206" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">206</span></span></a>
          received the Word of faith through the preaching of Paulinus,<a href="#note_207" id="noteref_207" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">207</span></span></a> of
          whom we have before spoken. This king, as an earnest of his
          reception of the faith, and his share in the heavenly kingdom,
          received an increase also of his temporal realm, for he reduced
          under his dominion all the parts of Britain<a href="#note_208" id="noteref_208" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">208</span></span></a> that
          were provinces either of the English, or of the Britons, a thing
          which no English king had ever done before; and he even subjected
          to the English the Mevanian islands, as has been said above.<a href="#note_209" id="noteref_209" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">209</span></span></a> The
          more important of these, which is to the southward, is the larger
          in extent, and more fruitful, containing nine hundred and sixty
          families, according to the English computation; the other contains
          above three hundred.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The occasion of
          this nation's reception of the faith was the alliance by marriage
          of their aforesaid king with the kings of Kent, for he had taken to
          wife Ethelberg, otherwise called Tata,<a href="#note_210" id="noteref_210" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">210</span></span></a>
          daughter to King Ethelbert. When he first sent ambassadors to ask
          her in marriage of her brother Eadbald, who then reigned in Kent,
          he received the answer, <span class="tei tei-q">“That it was not
          lawful to give a Christian maiden in marriage to a pagan husband,
          lest the faith and the mysteries of the heavenly King should be
          profaned by her union with a king that was altogether a stranger to
          the worship of the true God.”</span> This answer being brought to
          Edwin by his messengers, he promised that he would in no manner act
          in opposition to the Christian faith, which the maiden professed;
          but would give leave to her, and all that went with her, men and
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page103">[pg 103]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg103"/> women, bishops and
          clergy, to follow their faith and worship after the custom of the
          Christians. Nor did he refuse to accept that religion himself, if,
          being examined by wise men, it should be found more holy and more
          worthy of God.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">So the maiden
          was promised, and sent to Edwin, and in accordance with the
          agreement, Paulinus, a man beloved of God, was ordained bishop, to
          go with her, and by daily exhortations, and celebrating the
          heavenly Mysteries, to confirm her and her company, lest they
          should be corrupted by intercourse with the pagans. Paulinus was
          ordained bishop by the Archbishop Justus, on the 21st day of July,
          in the year of our Lord 625, and so came to King Edwin with the
          aforesaid maiden as an attendant on their union in the flesh. But
          his mind was wholly bent upon calling the nation to which he was
          sent to the knowledge of truth; according to the words of the
          Apostle, <span class="tei tei-q">“To espouse her to the one true
          Husband, that he might present her as a chaste virgin to
          Christ.”</span><a href="#note_211" id="noteref_211" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">211</span></span></a> Being
          come into that province, he laboured much, not only to retain those
          that went with him, by the help of God, that they should not
          abandon the faith, but, if haply he might, to convert some of the
          pagans to the grace of the faith by his preaching. But, as the
          Apostle says, though he laboured long in the Word, <span class="tei tei-q">“The god of this world blinded the minds of them that
          believed not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ
          should shine unto them.”</span><a href="#note_212" id="noteref_212" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">212</span></span></a></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The next year
          there came into the province one called Eumer, sent by the king of
          the West-Saxons, whose name was Cuichelm,<a href="#note_213" id="noteref_213" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">213</span></span></a> to
          lie in wait for King Edwin, in hopes at once to deprive him of his
          kingdom and his life. He had a two-edged dagger, dipped in poison,
          to the end that, if the wound inflicted by the weapon did not avail
          to kill the king, it might be aided by the deadly venom. He came to
          the king on the first day of the Easter <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page104">[pg 104]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg104"/> festival,<a href="#note_214" id="noteref_214" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">214</span></span></a> at
          the river Derwent, where there was then a royal township,<a href="#note_215" id="noteref_215" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">215</span></span></a> and
          being admitted as if to deliver a message from his master, whilst
          unfolding in cunning words his pretended embassy, he started up on
          a sudden, and unsheathing the dagger under his garment, assaulted
          the king. When Lilla, the king's most devoted servant, saw this,
          having no buckler at hand to protect the king from death, he at
          once interposed his own body to receive the blow; but the enemy
          struck home with such force, that he wounded the king through the
          body of the slaughtered thegn. Being then attacked on all sides
          with swords, in the confusion he also slew impiously with his
          dagger another of the thegns, whose name was Forthhere.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">On that same
          holy Easter night, the queen had brought forth to the king a
          daughter, called Eanfled. The king, in the presence of Bishop
          Paulinus, gave thanks to his gods for the birth of his daughter;
          and the bishop, on his part, began to give thanks to Christ, and to
          tell the king, that by his prayers to Him he had obtained that the
          queen should bring forth the child in safety, and without grievous
          pain. The king, delighted with his words, promised, that if God
          would grant him life and victory over the king by whom the murderer
          who had wounded him had been sent, he would renounce his idols, and
          serve Christ; and as a pledge that he would perform his promise, he
          delivered up that same daughter to Bishop Paulinus, to be
          consecrated to Christ. She was the first to be baptized of the
          nation of the Northumbrians, and she received Baptism on the holy
          day of Pentecost, along with eleven others of her house.<a href="#note_216" id="noteref_216" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">216</span></span></a> At
          that time, the king, being recovered of the wound which he had
          received, raised an army and marched against <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page105">[pg 105]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg105"/> the nation of the West-Saxons; and
          engaging in war, either slew or received in surrender all those of
          whom he learned that they had conspired to murder him. So he
          returned victorious into his own country, but he would not
          immediately and unadvisedly embrace the mysteries of the Christian
          faith, though he no longer worshipped idols, ever since he made the
          promise that he would serve Christ; but first took heed earnestly
          to be instructed at leisure by the venerable Paulinus, in the
          knowledge of faith, and to confer with such as he knew to be the
          wisest of his chief men, inquiring what they thought was fittest to
          be done in that case. And being a man of great natural sagacity, he
          often sat alone by himself a long time in silence, deliberating in
          the depths of his heart how he should proceed, and to which
          religion he should adhere.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc101"/> <a id="pdf102"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. X. How Pope Boniface, by
          letter, exhorted the same king to embrace the faith.
          [</span><span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-style: italic">Circ.</span></span>
<span style="font-size: 144%">625</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At this time he
          received a letter from Pope Boniface<a href="#note_217" id="noteref_217" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">217</span></span></a>
          exhorting him to embrace the faith, which was as follows:</p>
<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em"><span style="font-size: 90%">COPY OF THE LETTER OF THE MOST BLESSED AND
          APOSTOLIC POPE OF THE CHURCH OF THE CITY OF ROME, BONIFACE,
          ADDRESSED TO THE ILLUSTRIOUS EDWIN, KING OF THE ENGLISH.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em"><span class="tei tei-q"><span style="font-size: 90%">“</span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">To
            the illustrious Edwin, king of the English, Bishop Boniface, the
            servant of the servants of God.</span></span> <span style="font-size: 90%">Although the power of the Supreme Deity cannot
            be expressed by</span> <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page106">[pg
            106]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg106"/><span style="font-size: 90%">the function of
            human speech, seeing that, by its own greatness, it so consists
            in invisible and unsearchable eternity, that no keenness of wit
            can comprehend or express how great it is; yet inasmuch as His
            Humanity, having opened the doors of the heart to receive
            Himself, mercifully, by secret inspiration, puts into the minds
            of men such things as It reveals concerning Itself,</span><a href="#note_218" id="noteref_218" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">218</span></span></a>
<span style="font-size: 90%">we have thought fit to extend our
            episcopal care so far as to make known to you the fulness of the
            Christian faith; to the end that, bringing to your knowledge the
            Gospel of Christ, which our Saviour commanded should be preached
            to all nations, we might offer to you the cup of the means of
            salvation.</span><a href="#note_219" id="noteref_219" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">219</span></span></a></span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em"><span class="tei tei-q"><span style="font-size: 90%">“</span><span style="font-size: 90%">Thus the goodness of the Supreme Majesty, which,
            by the word alone of His command, made and created all things,
            the heaven, the earth, the sea, and all that in them is,
            disposing the order by which they should subsist, hath, ordaining
            all things, with the counsel of His co-eternal Word, and the
            unity of the Holy Spirit, made man after His own image and
            likeness, forming him out of the mire of the earth; and granted
            him such high privilege of distinction, as to place him above all
            else; so that, preserving the bounds of the law of his being, his
            substance should be established to eternity. This God,—Father,
            Son, and Holy Ghost, the undivided Trinity,—from the east unto
            the west, through faith by confession to the saving of their
            souls, men worship and adore as the Creator of all things, and
            their own Maker; to Whom also the heights of empire and the
            powers of the world are subject, because the pre-eminence of all
            kingdoms is granted by His disposition. It hath pleased Him,
            therefore, in the mercy of His loving kindness, and for the
            greater benefit of all His creatures,</span><a href="#note_220" id="noteref_220" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">220</span></span></a>
<span style="font-size: 90%">by the fire of His Holy Spirit
            wonderfully to kindle the cold hearts even of</span> <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page107">[pg 107]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg107"/><span style="font-size: 90%">the nations seated at the extremities of the
            earth in the knowledge of Himself.</span></span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em"><span class="tei tei-q"><span style="font-size: 90%">“</span><span style="font-size: 90%">For we suppose, since the two countries are near
            together, that your Highness has fully understood what the
            clemency of our Redeemer has effected in the enlightenment of our
            illustrious son, King Eadbald, and the nations under his rule; we
            therefore trust, with assured confidence that, through the
            long-suffering of Heaven, His wonderful gift will be also
            conferred on you; since, indeed, we have learnt that your
            illustrious consort, who is discerned to be one flesh with you,
            has been blessed with the reward of eternity, through the
            regeneration of Holy Baptism. We have, therefore, taken care by
            this letter, with all the goodwill of heartfelt love, to exhort
            your Highness, that, abhorring idols and their worship, and
            despising the foolishness of temples, and the deceitful
            flatteries of auguries, you believe in God the Father Almighty,
            and His Son Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost, to the end that,
            believing and being released from the bonds of captivity to the
            Devil, you may, through the co-operating power of the Holy and
            undivided Trinity, be partaker of the eternal
            life.</span></span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em"><span class="tei tei-q"><span style="font-size: 90%">“</span><span style="font-size: 90%">How great guilt they lie under, who adhere in
            their worship to the pernicious superstition of idolatry, appears
            by the examples of the perishing of those whom they worship.
            Wherefore it is said of them by the Psalmist,</span> <span class="tei tei-q"><span style="font-size: 90%">‘</span><span style="font-size: 90%">All the gods of the nations are
            devils,</span><a href="#note_221" id="noteref_221" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">221</span></span></a>
<span style="font-size: 90%">but the Lord made the
            heavens.</span><span style="font-size: 90%">’</span></span>
<span style="font-size: 90%">And again,</span> <span class="tei tei-q"><span style="font-size: 90%">‘</span><span style="font-size: 90%">Eyes have they, but they see not; they have
            ears, but they hear not; noses have they, but they smell not;
            they have hands, but they handle not; feet have they, but they
            walk not. Therefore they are made like unto those that place the
            hope of their confidence in them.</span><span style="font-size: 90%">’</span></span><a href="#note_222" id="noteref_222" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">222</span></span></a>
<span style="font-size: 90%">For how can they have power to help
            any man, that are made out of corruptible matter, by the hands of
            your inferiors and subjects, and on which, by employing human
            art, you have bestowed a lifeless similitude of members? which,
            moreover, unless they</span> <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page108">[pg 108]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg108"/><span style="font-size: 90%">be moved by
            you, will not be able to walk; but, like a stone fixed in one
            place, being so formed, and having no understanding, sunk in
            insensibility, have no power of doing harm or good. We cannot,
            therefore, by any manner of discernment conceive how you come to
            be so deceived as to follow and worship those gods, to whom you
            yourselves have given the likeness of a body.</span></span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em"><span class="tei tei-q"><span style="font-size: 90%">“</span><span style="font-size: 90%">It behoves you, therefore, by taking upon you
            the sign of the Holy Cross, by which the human race has been
            redeemed, to root out of your hearts all the accursed
            deceitfulness of the snares of the Devil, who is ever the jealous
            foe of the works of the Divine Goodness, and to put forth your
            hands and with all your might set to work to break in pieces and
            destroy those which you have hitherto fashioned of wood or stone
            to be your gods. For the very destruction and decay of these,
            which never had the breath of life in them, nor could in any wise
            receive feeling from their makers, may plainly teach you how
            worthless that was which you hitherto worshipped. For you
            yourselves, who have received the breath of life from the Lord,
            are certainly better than these which are wrought with hands,
            seeing that Almighty God has appointed you to be descended, after
            many ages and through many generations, from the first man whom
            he formed. Draw near, then, to the knowledge of Him Who created
            you, Who breathed the breath of life into you, Who sent His
            only-begotten Son for your redemption, to save you from original
            sin, that being delivered from the power of the Devil's
            perversity and wickedness, He might bestow on you a heavenly
            reward.</span></span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em"><span class="tei tei-q"><span style="font-size: 90%">“</span><span style="font-size: 90%">Hearken to the words of the preachers, and the
            Gospel of God, which they declare to you, to the end that,
            believing, as has been said before more than once, in God the
            Father Almighty, and in Jesus Christ His Son, and the Holy Ghost,
            and the indivisible Trinity, having put to flight the thoughts of
            devils, and driven from you the temptations of the venomous and
            deceitful enemy, and being born again of water and the Holy
            Ghost, you may, through the aid of His bounty, dwell in the
            brightness</span> <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page109">[pg
            109]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg109"/><span style="font-size: 90%">of eternal
            glory with Him in Whom you shall have believed.</span></span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em"><span class="tei tei-q"><span style="font-size: 90%">“</span><span style="font-size: 90%">We have, moreover, sent you the blessing of your
            protector, the blessed Peter, chief of the Apostles, to wit, a
            shirt of proof with one gold ornament, and one cloak of Ancyra,
            which we pray your Highness to accept with all the goodwill with
            which it is sent by us.</span><span style="font-size: 90%">”</span></span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc103"/> <a id="pdf104"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_II_Chap_XI"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XI. How Pope Boniface advised
          the king's consort to use her best endeavours for his salvation.
          [</span><span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-style: italic">Circ.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">625</span>
<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The same pope
          also wrote to King Edwin's consort, Ethelberg, to this effect:</p>
<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em"><span style="font-size: 90%">THE COPY OF THE LETTER OF THE MOST BLESSED AND
          APOSTOLIC BONIFACE, POPE OF THE CITY OF ROME, TO ETHELBERG, KING
          EDWIN'S QUEEN.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em"><span class="tei tei-q"><span style="font-size: 90%">“</span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">To
            the illustrious lady his daughter, Queen Ethelberg, Boniface,
            bishop, servant of the servants of God.</span></span><span style="font-size: 90%">The goodness of our Redeemer has in His abundant
            Providence offered the means of salvation to the human race,
            which He rescued, by the shedding of His precious Blood, from the
            bonds of captivity to the Devil; to the end that, when He had
            made known His name in divers ways to the nations, they might
            acknowledge their Creator by embracing the mystery of the
            Christian faith. And this the mystical purification of your
            regeneration plainly shows to have been bestowed upon the mind of
            your Highness by God's gift. Our heart, therefore, has greatly
            rejoiced in the benefit bestowed by the bounty of the Lord, for
            that He has vouchsafed, in your confession, to kindle a spark of
            the orthodox religion, by which He might the more easily inflame
            with the love of Himself the understanding, not only of your
            illustrious consort, but also of all the nation that is subject
            to you.</span></span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em"><span class="tei tei-q"><span style="font-size: 90%">“</span><span style="font-size: 90%">For we have been informed by those, who came to
            acquaint us with the laudable conversion of our
            illustrious</span> <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page110">[pg
            110]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg110"/><span style="font-size: 90%">son, King
            Eadbald, that your Highness, also, having received the wonderful
            mystery of the Christian faith, continually excels in the
            performance of works pious and acceptable to God; that you
            likewise carefully refrain from the worship of idols, and the
            deceits of temples and auguries, and with unimpaired devotion,
            give yourself so wholly to the love of your Redeemer, as never to
            cease from lending your aid in spreading the Christian faith. But
            when our fatherly love earnestly inquired concerning your
            illustrious consort, we were given to understand, that he still
            served abominable idols, and delayed to yield obedience in giving
            ear to the voice of the preachers. This occasioned us no small
            grief, that he that is one flesh with you still remained a
            stranger to the knowledge of the supreme and undivided Trinity.
            Whereupon we, in our fatherly care, have not delayed to admonish
            and exhort your Christian Highness, to the end that, filled with
            the support of the Divine inspiration, you should not defer to
            strive, both in season and out of season, that with the
            co-operating power of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, your
            husband also may be added to the number of Christians; that so
            you may uphold the rights of marriage in the bond of a holy and
            unblemished union. For it is written,</span> <span class="tei tei-q"><span style="font-size: 90%">‘</span><span style="font-size: 90%">They twain shall be one
            flesh.</span><span style="font-size: 90%">’</span></span><a href="#note_223" id="noteref_223" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">223</span></span></a>
<span style="font-size: 90%">How then can it be said, that there
            is unity in the bond between you, if he continues a stranger to
            the brightness of your faith, separated from it by the darkness
            of detestable error?</span></span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em"><span class="tei tei-q"><span style="font-size: 90%">“</span><span style="font-size: 90%">Wherefore, applying yourself continually to
            prayer, do not cease to beg of the long-suffering of the Divine
            Mercy the benefits of his illumination; to the end, that those
            whom the union of carnal affection has manifestly made in a
            manner to be one body, may, after this life continue in perpetual
            fellowship, by the unity of faith. Persist, therefore,
            illustrious daughter, and to the utmost of your power endeavour
            to soften the hardness of his heart by carefully making known to
            him the Divine precepts; pouring into his mind a knowledge of the
            greatness of</span> <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page111">[pg
            111]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg111"/><span style="font-size: 90%">that mystery
            which you have received by faith, and of the marvellous reward
            which, by the new birth, you have been made worthy to obtain.
            Inflame the coldness of his heart by the message of the Holy
            Ghost, that he may put from him the deadness of an evil worship,
            and the warmth of the Divine faith may kindle his understanding
            through your frequent exhortations; and so the testimony of Holy
            Scripture may shine forth clearly, fulfilled by you,</span>
<span class="tei tei-q"><span style="font-size: 90%">‘</span><span style="font-size: 90%">The
            unbelieving husband shall be saved by the believing
            wife.</span><span style="font-size: 90%">’</span></span><a href="#note_224" id="noteref_224" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">224</span></span></a>
<span style="font-size: 90%">For to this end you have obtained
            the mercy of the Lord's goodness, that you might restore with
            increase to your Redeemer the fruit of faith and of the benefits
            entrusted to your hands. That you may be able to fulfil this
            task, supported by the help of His loving kindness we do not
            cease to implore with frequent prayers.</span></span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em"><span class="tei tei-q"><span style="font-size: 90%">“</span><span style="font-size: 90%">Having premised thus much, in pursuance of the
            duty of our fatherly affection, we exhort you, that when the
            opportunity of a bearer shall offer, you will with all speed
            comfort us with the glad tidings of the wonderful work which the
            heavenly Power shall vouchsafe to perform by your means in the
            conversion</span><a href="#note_225" id="noteref_225" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">225</span></span></a>
<span style="font-size: 90%">of your consort, and of the nation
            subject to you; to the end, that our solicitude, which earnestly
            awaits the fulfilment of its desire in the soul's salvation of
            you and yours, may, by hearing from you, be set at rest; and that
            we, discerning more fully the light of the Divine propitiation
            shed abroad in you, may with a joyful confession abundantly
            return due thanks to God, the Giver of all good things, and to
            the blessed Peter, the chief of the Apostles.</span></span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em"><span class="tei tei-q"><span style="font-size: 90%">“</span><span style="font-size: 90%">We have, moreover, sent you the blessing of your
            protector, the blessed Peter, the chief of the Apostles, to wit,
            a silver looking-glass, and a gilded ivory comb, which we pray
            your Highness to accept with all the goodwill with which it is
            sent by us.</span><span style="font-size: 90%">”</span></span></p>
</div>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page112">[pg 112]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg112"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc105"/> <a id="pdf106"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_II_Chap_XII"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XII. How Edwin was persuaded to
          believe by a vision which he had once seen when he was in exile.
          [</span><span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-style: italic">Circ.</span></span>
<span style="font-size: 144%">616</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Thus wrote the
          aforesaid Pope Boniface for the salvation of King Edwin and his
          nation. But a heavenly vision, which the Divine Goodness was
          pleased once to reveal to this king, when he was in banishment at
          the court of Redwald, king of the Angles,<a href="#note_226" id="noteref_226" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">226</span></span></a> was
          of no little use in urging him to receive and understand the
          doctrines of salvation. For when Paulinus perceived that it was a
          difficult task to incline the king's proud mind to the humility of
          the way of salvation and the reception of the mystery of the
          life-giving Cross, and at the same time was employing the word of
          exhortation with men, and prayer to the Divine Goodness, for the
          salvation of Edwin and his subjects; at length, as we may suppose,
          it was shown him in spirit what the nature of the vision was that
          had been formerly revealed from Heaven to the king. Then he lost no
          time, but immediately admonished the king to perform the vow which
          he had made, when he received the vision, promising to fulfil it,
          if he should be delivered from the troubles of that time, and
          advanced to the throne.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The vision was
          this. When Ethelfrid,<a href="#note_227" id="noteref_227" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">227</span></span></a> his
          predecessor, was persecuting him, he wandered for many years as an
          exile, hiding in divers places and kingdoms, and at last came to
          Redwald, beseeching him to give him protection against the snares
          of his powerful persecutor. Redwald willingly received him, and
          promised to perform what was asked of him. But when Ethelfrid
          understood that he had appeared in that province, and that he and
          his companions were hospitably entertained by Redwald, he sent
          messengers to bribe that king with a great sum of money to murder
          him, but without effect. He sent a second and a third time,
          offering a greater bribe each <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page113">[pg 113]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg113"/> time, and, moreover, threatening to make war
          on him if his offer should be despised. Redwald, whether terrified
          by his threats, or won over by his gifts, complied with this
          request, and promised either to kill Edwin, or to deliver him up to
          the envoys. A faithful friend of his, hearing of this, went into
          his chamber, where he was going to bed, for it was the first hour
          of the night; and calling him out, told him what the king had
          promised to do with him, adding, <span class="tei tei-q">“If,
          therefore, you are willing, I will this very hour conduct you out
          of this province, and lead you to a place where neither Redwald nor
          Ethelfrid shall ever find you.”</span> He answered, <span class="tei tei-q">“I thank you for your good will, yet I cannot do what
          you propose, and be guilty of being the first to break the compact
          I have made with so great a king, when he has done me no harm, nor
          shown any enmity to me; but, on the contrary, if I must die, let it
          rather be by his hand than by that of any meaner man. For whither
          shall I now fly, when I have for so many long years been a vagabond
          through all the provinces of Britain, to escape the snares of my
          enemies?”</span> His friend went away; Edwin remained alone
          without, and sitting with a heavy heart before the palace, began to
          be overwhelmed with many thoughts, not knowing what to do, or which
          way to turn.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">When he had
          remained a long time in silent anguish of mind, consumed with
          inward fire,<a href="#note_228" id="noteref_228" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">228</span></span></a> on a
          sudden in the stillness of the dead of night he saw approaching a
          person, whose face and habit were strange to him, at sight of whom,
          seeing that he was unknown and unlooked for, he was not a little
          startled. The stranger coming close up, saluted him, and asked why
          he sat there in solitude on a stone troubled and wakeful at that
          time, when all others were taking their rest, and were fast asleep.
          Edwin, in his turn, asked, what it was to him, whether he spent the
          night within doors or abroad. The stranger, in reply, said,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Do not think that I am ignorant of the
          cause of your grief, your watching, and sitting alone without. For
          I know of a surety who you <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page114">[pg 114]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg114"/> are, and why you grieve, and the evils which
          you fear will soon fall upon you. But tell me, what reward you
          would give the man who should deliver you out of these troubles,
          and persuade Redwald neither to do you any harm himself, nor to
          deliver you up to be murdered by your enemies.”</span> Edwin
          replied, that he would give such an one all that he could in return
          for so great a benefit. The other further added, <span class="tei tei-q">“What if he should also assure you, that your enemies
          should be destroyed, and you should be a king surpassing in power,
          not only all your own ancestors, but even all that have reigned
          before you in the English nation?”</span> Edwin, encouraged by
          these questions, did not hesitate to promise that he would make a
          fitting return to him who should confer such benefits upon him.
          Then the other spoke a third time and said, <span class="tei tei-q">“But if he who should truly foretell that all these
          great blessings are about to befall you, could also give you better
          and more profitable counsel for your life and salvation than any of
          your fathers or kindred ever heard, do you consent to submit to
          him, and to follow his wholesome guidance?”</span> Edwin at once
          promised that he would in all things follow the teaching of that
          man who should deliver him from so many great calamities, and raise
          him to a throne.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Having received
          this answer, the man who talked to him laid his right hand on his
          head saying, <span class="tei tei-q">“When this sign shall be given
          you, remember this present discourse that has passed between us,
          and do not delay the performance of what you now promise.”</span>
          Having uttered these words, he is said to have immediately
          vanished. So the king perceived that it was not a man, but a
          spirit, that had appeared to him.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Whilst the royal
          youth still sat there alone, glad of the comfort he had received,
          but still troubled and earnestly pondering who he was, and whence
          he came, that had so talked to him, his aforesaid friend came to
          him, and greeting him with a glad countenance, <span class="tei tei-q">“Rise,”</span> said he, <span class="tei tei-q">“go in;
          calm and put away your anxious cares, and compose yourself in body
          and mind to sleep; for the king's resolution is altered, and he
          designs to do you no <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page115">[pg
          115]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg115"/>
          harm, but rather to keep his pledged faith; for when he had
          privately made known to the queen his intention of doing what I
          told you before, she dissuaded him from it, reminding him that it
          was altogether unworthy of so great a king to sell his good friend
          in such distress for gold, and to sacrifice his honour, which is
          more valuable than all other adornments, for the love of
          money.”</span> In short, the king did as has been said, and not
          only refused to deliver up the banished man to his enemy's
          messengers, but helped him to recover his kingdom. For as soon as
          the messengers had returned home, he raised a mighty army to subdue
          Ethelfrid; who, meeting him with much inferior forces, (for Redwald
          had not given him time to gather and unite all his power,) was
          slain on the borders of the kingdom of Mercia, on the east side of
          the river that is called Idle.<a href="#note_229" id="noteref_229" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">229</span></span></a> In
          this battle, Redwald's son, called Raegenheri, was killed. Thus
          Edwin, in accordance with the prophecy he had received, not only
          escaped the danger from his enemy, but, by his death, succeeded the
          king on the throne.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">King Edwin,
          therefore, delaying to receive the Word of God at the preaching of
          Paulinus, and being wont for some time, as has been said, to sit
          many hours alone, and seriously to ponder with himself what he was
          to do, and what religion he was to follow, the man of God came to
          him one day, laid his right hand on his head, and asked, whether he
          knew that sign? The king, trembling, was ready to fall down at his
          feet, but he raised him up, and speaking to him with the voice of a
          friend, said, <span class="tei tei-q">“Behold, by the gift of God
          you have escaped the hands of the enemies whom you feared. Behold,
          you have obtained of His bounty the kingdom which you desired. Take
          heed not to delay to perform your third promise; accept the faith,
          and keep the precepts of Him Who, delivering you from temporal
          adversity, has raised you to the honour of a temporal kingdom; and
          if, from this time <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page116">[pg
          116]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg116"/>
          forward, you shall be obedient to His will, which through me He
          signifies to you, He will also deliver you from the everlasting
          torments of the wicked, and make you partaker with Him of His
          eternal kingdom in heaven.”</span></p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc107"/> <a id="pdf108"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_II_Chap_XIII"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XIII. Of the Council he held
          with his chief men concerning their reception of the faith of
          Christ, and how the high priest profaned his own altars.
          [627</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The king,
          hearing these words, answered, that he was both willing and bound
          to receive the faith which Paulinus taught; but that he would
          confer about it with his chief friends and counsellors, to the end
          that if they also were of his opinion, they might all together be
          consecrated to Christ in the font of life. Paulinus consenting, the
          king did as he said; for, holding a council with the wise
          men,<a href="#note_230" id="noteref_230" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">230</span></span></a> he
          asked of every one in particular what he thought of this doctrine
          hitherto unknown to them, and the new worship of God that was
          preached? The chief of his own priests, Coifi, immediately answered
          him, <span class="tei tei-q">“O king, consider what this is which
          is now preached to us; for I verily declare to you what I have
          learnt beyond doubt, that the religion which we have hitherto
          professed has no virtue in it and no profit. For none of your
          people has applied himself more diligently to the worship of our
          gods than I; and yet there are many who receive greater favours
          from you, and are more preferred than I, and are more prosperous in
          all that they undertake to do or to get. Now if the gods were good
          for any thing, they would rather forward me, who have been careful
          to serve them with greater zeal. It remains, therefore, that if
          upon examination you find those new doctrines, which are now
          preached to us, better and more efficacious, we hasten to receive
          them without any delay.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Another of the
          king's chief men, approving of his wise words and exhortations,
          added thereafter: <span class="tei tei-q">“The present <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page117">[pg 117]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg117"/> life of man upon earth, O king, seems
          to me, in comparison with that time which is unknown to us, like to
          the swift flight of a sparrow through the house wherein you sit at
          supper in winter, with your ealdormen and thegns, while the fire
          blazes in the midst, and the hall is warmed, but the wintry storms
          of rain or snow are raging abroad. The sparrow, flying in at one
          door and immediately out at another, whilst he is within, is safe
          from the wintry tempest; but after a short space of fair weather,
          he immediately vanishes out of your sight, passing from winter into
          winter again. So this life of man appears for a little while, but
          of what is to follow or what went before we know nothing at all.
          If, therefore, this new doctrine tells us something more certain,
          it seems justly to deserve to be followed.”</span> The other elders
          and king's counsellors, by Divine prompting, spoke to the same
          effect.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But Coifi added,
          that he wished more attentively to hear Paulinus discourse
          concerning the God Whom he preached. When he did so, at the king's
          command, Coifi, hearing his words, cried out, <span class="tei tei-q">“This long time I have perceived that what we
          worshipped was naught; because the more diligently I sought after
          truth in that worship, the less I found it. But now I freely
          confess, that such truth evidently appears in this preaching as can
          confer on us the gifts of life, of salvation, and of eternal
          happiness. For which reason my counsel is, O king, that we
          instantly give up to ban and fire those temples and altars which we
          have consecrated without reaping any benefit from them.”</span> In
          brief, the king openly assented to the preaching of the Gospel by
          Paulinus, and renouncing idolatry, declared that he received the
          faith of Christ: and when he inquired of the aforesaid high priest
          of his religion, who should first desecrate the altars and temples
          of their idols, with the precincts that were about them, he
          answered, <span class="tei tei-q">“I; for who can more fittingly
          than myself destroy those things which I worshipped in my folly,
          for an example to all others, through the wisdom which has been
          given me by the true God?”</span> Then immediately, in contempt of
          his vain superstitions, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page118">[pg
          118]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg118"/>
          he desired the king to furnish him with arms and a stallion, that
          he might mount and go forth to destroy the idols; for it was not
          lawful before for the high priest either to carry arms, or to ride
          on anything but a mare. Having, therefore, girt a sword about him,
          with a spear in his hand, he mounted the king's stallion, and went
          his way to the idols. The multitude, beholding it, thought that he
          was mad; but as soon as he drew near the temple he did not delay to
          desecrate it by casting into it the spear which he held; and
          rejoicing in the knowledge of the worship of the true God, he
          commanded his companions to tear down and set on fire the temple,
          with all its precincts. This place where the idols once stood is
          still shown, not far from York, to the eastward, beyond the river
          Derwent, and is now called Godmunddingaham,<a href="#note_231" id="noteref_231" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">231</span></span></a> where
          the high priest, by the inspiration of the true God, profaned and
          destroyed the altars which he had himself consecrated.<a href="#note_232" id="noteref_232" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">232</span></span></a></p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc109"/> <a id="pdf110"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_II_Chap_XIV"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XIV. How King Edwin and his
          nation became Christians; and where Paulinus baptized them.
          [627</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">King Edwin,
          therefore, with all the nobility of the nation, and a large number
          of the common sort, received the faith, and the washing of holy
          regeneration, in the eleventh year of his reign, which is the year
          of our Lord 627, and about one hundred and eighty after the coming
          of the English into Britain. He was baptized at York, on the holy
          day of Easter,<a href="#note_233" id="noteref_233" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">233</span></span></a> being
          the 12th of April, in the church of St. Peter the Apostle, which he
          himself had built of timber there in haste, whilst he was a
          catechumen receiving instruction in order to be admitted to
          baptism. In that city also he bestowed upon his instructor and
          bishop, Paulinus, his episcopal see. But as soon as he was
          baptized, he set about building, by the direction of <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page119">[pg 119]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg119"/> Paulinus, in the same place a larger
          and nobler church of stone, in the midst whereof the oratory which
          he had first erected should be enclosed.<a href="#note_234" id="noteref_234" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">234</span></span></a>
          Having, therefore, laid the foundation, he began to build the
          church square, encompassing the former oratory. But before the
          walls were raised to their full height, the cruel death<a href="#note_235" id="noteref_235" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">235</span></span></a> of
          the king left that work to be finished by Oswald his successor.
          Paulinus, for the space of six years from this time, that is, till
          the end of the king's reign, with his consent and favour, preached
          the Word of God in that country, and as many as were foreordained
          to eternal life believed and were baptized. Among them were Osfrid
          and Eadfrid, King Edwin's sons who were both born to him, whilst he
          was in banishment, of Quenburga, the daughter of Cearl, king of the
          Mercians.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Afterwards other
          children of his, by Queen Ethelberg, were baptized, Ethelhun and
          his daughter Ethelthryth, and another, Wuscfrea, a son; the first
          two were snatched out of this life whilst they were still in the
          white garments of the newly-baptized,<a href="#note_236" id="noteref_236" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">236</span></span></a> and
          buried in the church at York. Yffi,<a href="#note_237" id="noteref_237" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">237</span></span></a> the
          son of Osfrid, was also baptized, and many other noble and royal
          persons. So great was then the fervour of the faith, as is
          reported, and the desire for the laver of salvation among the
          nation of the Northumbrians, that Paulinus at a certain time coming
          with the king and queen to the royal township, which is called
          Adgefrin,<a href="#note_238" id="noteref_238" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">238</span></span></a>
          stayed there with them thirty-six days, fully occupied in
          catechizing and baptizing; during which <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page120">[pg 120]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg120"/> days, from morning till night, he did nothing
          else but instruct the people resorting from all villages and
          places, in Christ's saving Word; and when they were instructed, he
          washed them with the water of absolution in the river Glen,<a href="#note_239" id="noteref_239" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">239</span></span></a> which
          is close by. This township, under the following kings, was
          abandoned, and another was built instead of it, at the place called
          Maelmin.<a href="#note_240" id="noteref_240" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">240</span></span></a></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">These things
          happened in the province of the Bernicians; but in that of the
          Deiri also, where he was wont often to be with the king, he
          baptized in the river Swale, which runs by the village of
          Cataract;<a href="#note_241" id="noteref_241" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">241</span></span></a> for
          as yet oratories, or baptisteries, could not be built in the early
          infancy of the Church in those parts. But in Campodonum,<a href="#note_242" id="noteref_242" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">242</span></span></a> where
          there was then a royal township, he built a church which the
          pagans, by whom King Edwin was slain, afterwards burnt, together
          with all the place. Instead of this royal seat the later kings
          built themselves a township in the country called Loidis.<a href="#note_243" id="noteref_243" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">243</span></span></a> But
          the altar, being of stone, escaped the fire and is still preserved
          in the monastery of the most reverend abbot and priest, Thrydwulf,
          which is in the forest of Elmet.<a href="#note_244" id="noteref_244" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">244</span></span></a></p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc111"/> <a id="pdf112"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_II_Chap_XV"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XV. How the province of the
          East Angles received the faith of Christ. [627-628</span>
<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Edwin was so
          zealous for the true worship, that he likewise persuaded Earpwald,
          king of the East Angles, and son of Redwald, to abandon his
          idolatrous superstitions, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page121">[pg
          121]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg121"/>
          and with his whole province to receive the faith and mysteries of
          Christ. And indeed his father Redwald had long before been
          initiated into the mysteries of the Christian faith in Kent, but in
          vain; for on his return home, he was seduced by his wife and
          certain perverse teachers, and turned aside from the sincerity of
          the faith; and thus his latter state was worse than the former; so
          that, like the Samaritans of old, he seemed at the same time to
          serve Christ and the gods whom he served before; and in the same
          temple he had an altar for the Christian Sacrifice, and another
          small one at which to offer victims to devils. Aldwulf,<a href="#note_245" id="noteref_245" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">245</span></span></a> king
          of that same province, who lived in our time, testifies that this
          temple had stood until his time, and that he had seen it when he
          was a boy. The aforesaid King Redwald was noble by birth, though
          ignoble in his actions, being the son of Tytilus, whose father was
          Uuffa, from whom the kings of the East Angles are called
          Uuffings.<a href="#note_246" id="noteref_246" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">246</span></span></a></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Earpwald, not
          long after he had embraced the Christian faith, was slain by one
          Ricbert, a pagan; and from that time the province was in error for
          three years, till Sigbert succeeded to the kingdom,<a href="#note_247" id="noteref_247" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">247</span></span></a>
          brother to the same Earpwald, a most Christian and learned man, who
          was banished, and went to live in Gaul during his brother's life,
          and was there initiated into the mysteries of the faith, whereof he
          made it his business to cause all his province to partake as soon
          as he came to the throne. His exertions were nobly promoted by
          Bishop Felix,<a href="#note_248" id="noteref_248" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">248</span></span></a>
<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page122">[pg 122]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg122"/> who, coming to
          Honorius, the archbishop,<a href="#note_249" id="noteref_249" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">249</span></span></a> from
          the parts of Burgundy, where he had been born and ordained, and
          having told him what he desired, was sent by him to preach the Word
          of life to the aforesaid nation of the Angles. Nor were his good
          wishes in vain; for the pious labourer in the spiritual field
          reaped therein a great harvest of believers, delivering all that
          province (according to the inner signification of his name) from
          long iniquity and unhappiness, and bringing it to the faith and
          works of righteousness, and the gifts of everlasting happiness. He
          had the see of his bishopric appointed him in the city
          Dommoc,<a href="#note_250" id="noteref_250" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">250</span></span></a> and
          having presided over the same province with pontifical authority
          seventeen years, he ended his days there in peace.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc113"/> <a id="pdf114"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_II_Chap_XVI"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XVI. How Paulinus preached in
          the province of Lindsey; and of the character of the reign of
          Edwin. [</span><span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-style: italic">Circ.</span></span>
<span style="font-size: 144%">628</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Paulinus also
          preached the Word to the province of Lindsey,<a href="#note_251" id="noteref_251" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">251</span></span></a> which
          is the first on the south side of the river Humber, stretching as
          far as the sea; and he first converted to the Lord the reeve of the
          city of Lincoln, whose name was Blaecca, with his whole house. He
          likewise built, in that city, a stone church of beautiful
          workmanship; the roof of which has either fallen through long
          neglect, or been thrown down by enemies, but the walls are still to
          be seen standing, and every year miraculous cures are wrought in
          that place, for the benefit of those who have faith to seek them.
          In that church, when <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page123">[pg
          123]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg123"/>
          Justus had departed to Christ, Paulinus consecrated Honorius bishop
          in his stead, as will be hereafter mentioned in its proper
          place.<a href="#note_252" id="noteref_252" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">252</span></span></a> A
          certain priest and abbot of the monastery of Peartaneu,<a href="#note_253" id="noteref_253" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">253</span></span></a> a man
          of singular veracity, whose name was Deda, told me concerning the
          faith of this province that an old man had informed him that he
          himself had been baptized at noon-day, by Bishop Paulinus, in the
          presence of King Edwin, and with him a great multitude of the
          people, in the river Trent, near the city, which in the English
          tongue is called Tiouulfingacaestir;<a href="#note_254" id="noteref_254" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">254</span></span></a> and
          he was also wont to describe the person of the same Paulinus,
          saying that he was tall of stature, stooping somewhat, his hair
          black, his visage thin, his nose slender and aquiline, his aspect
          both venerable and awe-inspiring. He had also with him in the
          ministry, James, the deacon,<a href="#note_255" id="noteref_255" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">255</span></span></a> a man
          of zeal and great fame in Christ and in the church, who lived even
          to our days.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">It is told that
          there was then such perfect peace in Britain, wheresoever the
          dominion of King Edwin extended, that, as is still proverbially
          said, a woman with her new-born babe might walk throughout the
          island, from sea to sea, without receiving any harm. That king took
          such care for the good of his nation, that in several places where
          he had seen clear springs near the highways, he caused stakes to be
          fixed, with copper drinking-vessels hanging on them, for the
          refreshment of travellers; nor durst any man touch them for any
          other purpose than that for which they were designed, either
          through the great dread they had of the king, or for the affection
          which they bore him. His dignity was so great throughout his
          dominions, that not only were his banners <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page124">[pg 124]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg124"/> borne before him in battle, but even in time
          of peace, when he rode about his cities, townships, or provinces,
          with his thegns, the standard-bearer was always wont to go before
          him. Also, when he walked anywhere along the streets, that sort of
          banner which the Romans call Tufa,<a href="#note_256" id="noteref_256" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">256</span></span></a> and
          the English, Thuuf, was in like manner borne before him.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc115"/> <a id="pdf116"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_II_Chap_XVII"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XVII. How Edwin received
          letters of exhortation from Pope Honorius, who also sent the pall
          to Paulinus. [634</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At that time
          Honorius, successor to Boniface, was Bishop of the Apostolic see.
          When he learned that the nation of the Northumbrians, with their
          king, had been, by the preaching of Paulinus, converted to the
          faith and confession of Christ, he sent the pall to the said
          Paulinus, and with it letters of exhortation to King Edwin, with
          fatherly love inflaming his zeal, to the end that he and his people
          should persist in belief of the truth which they had received. The
          contents of which letter were as follow:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">To his most noble son, and excellent lord,
          Edwin king of the Angles, Bishop Honorius, servant of the servants
          of God, greeting.</span></span> The wholeheartedness of your
          Christian Majesty, in the worship of your Creator, is so inflamed
          with the fire of faith, that it shines out far and wide, and, being
          reported throughout the world, brings forth plentiful fruits of
          your labours. For the terms of your kingship you know to be this,
          that taught by orthodox preaching the knowledge of your King and
          Creator, you believe and worship God, and as far as man is able,
          pay Him the sincere devotion of your mind. For what else are we
          able to offer to our God, but our readiness to worship Him and to
          pay Him our vows, persisting in good actions, and confessing Him
          the Creator of mankind? And, therefore, most excellent son, we
          exhort you with <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page125">[pg
          125]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg125"/>
          such fatherly love as is meet, to labour to preserve this gift in
          every way, by earnest striving and constant prayer, in that the
          Divine Mercy has vouchsafed to call you to His grace; to the end
          that He, Who has been pleased to deliver you from all errors, and
          bring you to the knowledge of His name in this present world, may
          likewise prepare a place for you in the heavenly country. Employing
          yourself, therefore, in reading frequently the works of my lord
          Gregory, your Evangelist, of apostolic memory, keep before your
          eyes that love of his doctrine, which he zealously bestowed for the
          sake of your souls; that his prayers may exalt your kingdom and
          people, and present you faultless before Almighty God. We are
          preparing with a willing mind immediately to grant those things
          which you hoped would be by us ordained for your bishops, and this
          we do on account of the sincerity of your faith, which has been
          made known to us abundantly in terms of praise by the bearers of
          these presents. We have sent two palls to the two metropolitans,
          Honorius and Paulinus;<a href="#note_257" id="noteref_257" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">257</span></span></a> to
          the intent, that when either of them shall be called out of this
          world to his Creator, the other may, by this authority of ours,
          substitute another bishop in his place; which privilege we are
          induced to grant by the warmth of our love for you, as well as by
          reason of the great extent of the provinces which lie between us
          and you; that we may in all things support your devotion and
          likewise satisfy your desires. May God's grace preserve your
          Highness in safety!”</span></p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc117"/> <a id="pdf118"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_II_Chap_XVIII"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XVIII. How Honorius, who
          succeeded Justus in the bishopric of Canterbury, received the pall
          and letters from Pope Honorius. [634</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the meantime,
          Archbishop Justus was taken up to the heavenly kingdom, on the 10th
          of November,<a href="#note_258" id="noteref_258" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">258</span></span></a> and
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page126">[pg 126]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg126"/> Honorius, who was
          elected to the see in his stead, came to Paulinus to be ordained,
          and meeting him at Lincoln was there consecrated the fifth prelate
          of the Church of Canterbury from Augustine. To him also the
          aforesaid Pope Honorius sent the pall, and a letter, wherein he
          ordains the same that he had before ordained in his epistle to King
          Edwin, to wit, that when either the Archbishop of Canterbury or of
          York shall depart this life, the survivor, being of the same
          degree, shall have power to ordain another bishop in the room of
          him that is departed; that it might not be necessary always to
          undertake the toilsome journey to Rome, at so great a distance by
          sea and land, to ordain an archbishop. Which letter we have also
          thought fit to insert in this our history:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Honorius to his most beloved brother
          Honorius:</span></span> Among the many good gifts which the mercy
          of our Redeemer is pleased to bestow on His servants He grants to
          us in His bounty, graciously conferred on us by His goodness, the
          special blessing of realizing by brotherly intercourse, as it were
          face to face, our mutual love. For which gift we continually render
          thanks to His Majesty; and we humbly beseech Him, that He will ever
          confirm your labour, beloved, in preaching the Gospel, and bringing
          forth fruit, and following the rule of your master and head, the
          holy Gregory; and that, for the advancement of His Church, He may
          by your means raise up further increase; to the end, that through
          faith and works, in the fear and love of God, what you and your
          predecessors have already gained from the seed sown by our lord
          Gregory, may grow strong and be further extended; that so the
          promises spoken by our Lord may hereafter be brought to pass in
          you; and that these words may summon you to everlasting happiness:
          <span class="tei tei-q">‘Come unto Me all ye that labour and are
          heavy laden, and I will refresh you.’</span><a href="#note_259" id="noteref_259" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">259</span></span></a> And
          again, <span class="tei tei-q">‘Well done, good and faithful
          servant; thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make
          thee ruler over many things; enter thou into the joy of
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page127">[pg 127]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg127"/> thy
          Lord.’</span><a href="#note_260" id="noteref_260" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">260</span></span></a> And
          we, most beloved brothers, sending you first these words of
          exhortation out of our enduring charity, do not fail further to
          grant those things which we perceive may be suitable for the
          privileges of your Churches.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Wherefore, in accordance with your request, and that
          of the kings our sons,<a href="#note_261" id="noteref_261" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">261</span></span></a> we do
          hereby in the name of the blessed Peter, chief of the Apostles,
          grant you authority, that when the Divine Grace shall call either
          of you to Himself, the survivor shall ordain a bishop in the room
          of him that is deceased. To which end also we have sent a pall to
          each of you, beloved, for celebrating the said ordination; that by
          the authority which we hereby commit to you, you may make an
          ordination acceptable to God; because the long distance of sea and
          land that lies between us and you, has obliged us to grant you
          this, that no loss may happen to your Church in any way, on any
          pretext whatever, but that the devotion of the people committed to
          you may increase the more. God preserve you in safety, most dear
          brother! Given the 11th day of June, in the reign of these our
          lords and emperors, in the twenty-fourth year of the reign of
          Heraclius, and the twenty-third after his consulship; and in the
          twenty-third of his son Constantine, and the third after his
          consulship; and in the third year of the most prosperous Caesar,
          his son Heraclius,<a href="#note_262" id="noteref_262" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">262</span></span></a> the
          seventh indiction; that is, in the year of our Lord,
          634.”</span></p>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page128">[pg 128]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg128"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc119"/> <a id="pdf120"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_II_Chap_XIX"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XIX. How the aforesaid Honorius
          first, and afterwards John, wrote letters to the nation of the
          Scots, concerning the observance of Easter, and the Pelagian
          heresy. [640</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The same Pope
          Honorius also wrote to the Scots,<a href="#note_263" id="noteref_263" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">263</span></span></a> whom
          he had found to err in the observance of the holy Festival of
          Easter, as has been shown above, with subtlety of argument
          exhorting them not to think themselves, few as they were, and
          placed in the utmost borders of the earth, wiser than all the
          ancient and modern Churches of Christ, throughout the world; and
          not to celebrate a different Easter, contrary to the Paschal
          calculation and the decrees of all the bishops upon earth sitting
          in synod. Likewise John,<a href="#note_264" id="noteref_264" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">264</span></span></a> who
          succeeded Severinus, successor to the same Honorius, being yet but
          Pope elect, sent to them letters of great authority and erudition
          for the purpose of correcting the same error; evidently showing,
          that Easter Sunday is to be found between the fifteenth of the moon
          and the twenty-first, as was approved in the Council of
          Nicaea.<a href="#note_265" id="noteref_265" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">265</span></span></a> He
          also in the same epistle admonished them to guard against the
          Pelagian heresy,<a href="#note_266" id="noteref_266" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">266</span></span></a> and
          reject it, for he had been informed that it was again springing up
          among them. The beginning of the epistle was as follows:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">To our most beloved and most holy Tomianus,
          Columbanus, Cromanus, Dinnaus, and Baithanus, bishops; to</span>
<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page129">[pg 129]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg129"/><span style="font-style: italic">Cromanus, Ernianus, Laistranus, Scellanus, and
          Segenus, priests; to Saranus and the rest of the Scottish doctors
          and abbots, Hilarus, the arch-presbyter, and vice-gerent of the
          holy Apostolic See; John, the deacon, and elect in the name of God;
          likewise John, the chief of the notaries and vice-gerent of the
          holy Apostolic See, and John, the servant of God, and counsellor of
          the same Apostolic See.</span></span><a href="#note_267" id="noteref_267" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">267</span></span></a> The
          writings which were brought by the bearers to Pope Severinus, of
          holy memory, were left, when he departed from the light of this
          world, without an answer to the questions contained in them. Lest
          any obscurity should long remain undispelled in a matter of so
          great moment, we opened the same, and found that some in your
          province, endeavouring to revive a new heresy out of an old one,
          contrary to the orthodox faith, do through the darkness of their
          minds reject our Easter, when Christ was sacrificed; and contend
          that the same should be kept with the Hebrews on the fourteenth of
          the moon.”</span><a href="#note_268" id="noteref_268" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">268</span></span></a></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">By this
          beginning of the epistle it evidently appears that this heresy
          arose among them in very late times, and that not all their nation,
          but only some of them, were involved in the same.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">After having
          laid down the manner of keeping Easter, they add this concerning
          the Pelagians in the same epistle:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And we have also learnt that the poison of the
          Pelagian heresy again springs up among you; we, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page130">[pg 130]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg130"/> therefore, exhort you, that you put
          away from your thoughts all such venomous and superstitious
          wickedness. For you cannot be ignorant how that execrable heresy
          has been condemned; for it has not only been abolished these two
          hundred years, but it is also daily condemned by us and buried
          under our perpetual ban; and we exhort you not to rake up the ashes
          of those whose weapons have been burnt. For who would not detest
          that insolent and impious assertion, <span class="tei tei-q">‘That
          man can live without sin of his own free will, and not through the
          grace of God?’</span> And in the first place, it is blasphemous
          folly to say that man is without sin, which none can be, but only
          the one Mediator between God and men, the Man Christ Jesus, Who was
          conceived and born without sin; for all other men, being born in
          original sin, are known to bear the mark of Adam's transgression,
          even whilst they are without actual sin, according to the saying of
          the prophet, <span class="tei tei-q">‘For behold, I was conceived
          in iniquity; and in sin did my mother give birth to
          me.’</span> ”</span><a href="#note_269" id="noteref_269" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">269</span></span></a></p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc121"/> <a id="pdf122"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_II_Chap_XX"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XX. How Edwin being slain,
          Paulinus returned into Kent, and had the bishopric of Rochester
          conferred upon him. [633</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Edwin reigned
          most gloriously seventeen years over the nations of the English and
          the Britons, six whereof, as has been said, he also was a soldier
          in the kingdom of Christ. Caedwalla,<a href="#note_270" id="noteref_270" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">270</span></span></a> king
          of the Britons, rebelled against him, being supported by the
          vigorous Penda, of the royal race of the Mercians, who from that
          time governed that nation for twenty-two years with varying
          success. <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page131">[pg
          131]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg131"/> A
          great battle being fought in the plain that is called
          Haethfelth,<a href="#note_271" id="noteref_271" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">271</span></span></a> Edwin
          was killed on the 12th of October, in the year of our Lord 633,
          being then forty-eight years of age, and all his army was either
          slain or dispersed. In the same war also, Osfrid,<a href="#note_272" id="noteref_272" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">272</span></span></a> one
          of his sons, a warlike youth, fell before him; Eadfrid,<a href="#note_273" id="noteref_273" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">273</span></span></a>
          another of them, compelled by necessity, went over to King Penda,
          and was by him afterwards slain in the reign of Oswald, contrary to
          his oath. At this time a great slaughter was made in the Church and
          nation of the Northumbrians; chiefly because one of the chiefs, by
          whom it was carried on, was a pagan, and the other a barbarian,
          more cruel than a pagan; for Penda, with all the nation of the
          Mercians, was an idolater, and a stranger to the name of Christ;
          but Caedwalla, though he professed and called himself a Christian,
          was so barbarous in his disposition and manner of living, that he
          did not even spare women and innocent children, but with bestial
          cruelty put all alike to death by torture, and overran all their
          country in his fury for a long time, intending to cut off all the
          race of the English within the borders of Britain. Nor did he pay
          any respect to the Christian religion which had sprung up among
          them; it being to this day the custom of the Britons to despise the
          faith and religion of the English, and to have no part with them in
          anything any more than with pagans. King Edwin's head was brought
          to York, and afterwards taken into the church of the blessed Peter
          the Apostle, which he had begun, but which his successor Oswald
          finished, as has been said before. It was laid in the chapel of the
          holy Pope Gregory, from whose disciples he had received the word of
          life.<a href="#note_274" id="noteref_274" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">274</span></span></a></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The affairs of
          the Northumbrians being thrown into confusion at the moment of this
          disaster, when there seemed to be no prospect of safety except in
          flight, Paulinus, taking with him Queen Ethelberg, whom he had
          before brought thither, returned into Kent by sea, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page132">[pg 132]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg132"/> and was very honourably received by the
          Archbishop Honorius and King Eadbald. He came thither under the
          conduct of Bassus, a most valiant thegn of King Edwin, having with
          him Eanfled, the daughter, and Wuscfrea, the son of Edwin, as well
          as Yffi, the son of Osfrid, Edwin's son.<a href="#note_275" id="noteref_275" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">275</span></span></a>
          Afterwards Ethelberg, for fear of the kings Eadbald and
          Oswald,<a href="#note_276" id="noteref_276" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">276</span></span></a> sent
          Wuscfrea and Yffi over into Gaul to be bred up by King
          Dagobert,<a href="#note_277" id="noteref_277" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">277</span></span></a> who
          was her friend; and there they both died in infancy, and were
          buried in the church with the honour due to royal children and to
          Christ's innocents. He also brought with him many rich goods of
          King Edwin, among which were a large gold cross, and a golden
          chalice, consecrated to the service of the altar, which are still
          preserved, and shown in the church of Canterbury.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At that time the
          church of Rochester had no pastor, for Romanus,<a href="#note_278" id="noteref_278" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">278</span></span></a> the
          bishop thereof, being sent on a mission to Pope Honorius by
          Archbishop Justus, was drowned in the Italian Sea; and thus
          Paulinus, at the request of Archbishop Honorius and King Eadbald,
          took upon him the charge of the same, and held it until he too, in
          his own time, departed to heaven, with the fruits of his glorious
          labours; and, dying in that Church, he left there the pall which he
          had received from the Pope of Rome. He had left behind him in his
          Church at York, James, the deacon,<a href="#note_279" id="noteref_279" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">279</span></span></a> a
          true churchman and a holy man, who continuing long after in that
          Church, by teaching and baptizing, rescued much prey from the
          ancient enemy; and from him the village, where he chiefly dwelt,
          near Cataract,<a href="#note_280" id="noteref_280" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">280</span></span></a> has
          its name to this day. He had great skill in singing in church, and
          when the province was afterwards restored to peace, and the number
          of the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page133">[pg
          133]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg133"/>
          faithful increased, he began to teach church music to many,
          according to the custom of the Romans, or of the Cantuarians.<a href="#note_281" id="noteref_281" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">281</span></span></a> And
          being old and full of days, as the Scripture says, he went the way
          of his fathers.</p>
</div>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page134">[pg 134]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg134"/>
<hr class="page"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 5.00em; margin-top: 5.00em">
<a id="toc123"/> <a id="pdf124"/>
<h1 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 3.46em; margin-top: 3.46em">
<span style="font-size: 173%">Book III</span></h1>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc125"/> <a id="pdf126"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_III_Chap_I"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. I. How King Edwin's next
          successors lost both the faith of their nation and the kingdom; but
          the most Christian King Oswald retrieved both. [633</span>
<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Edwin being
          slain in battle, the kingdom of the Deiri, to which province his
          family belonged, and where he first began to reign, passed to
          Osric, the son of his uncle Aelfric, who, through the preaching of
          Paulinus, had also received the mysteries of the faith. But the
          kingdom of the Bernicians—for into these two provinces the nation
          of the Northumbrians was formerly divided<a href="#note_282" id="noteref_282" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">282</span></span></a>—passed
          to Eanfrid, the son of Ethelfrid,<a href="#note_283" id="noteref_283" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">283</span></span></a> who
          derived his origin from the royal family of that province. For all
          the time that Edwin reigned, the sons of the aforesaid Ethelfrid,
          who had reigned before him, with many of the younger nobility,
          lived in banishment among the Scots or Picts, and were there
          instructed according to the doctrine of the Scots, and were renewed
          with the grace of Baptism. Upon the death of the king, their enemy,
          they were allowed to return home, and the aforesaid Eanfrid, as the
          eldest of them, became king of the Bernicians. Both those
          kings,<a href="#note_284" id="noteref_284" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">284</span></span></a> as
          soon as they obtained the government of their earthly kingdoms,
          abjured and betrayed the mysteries of the heavenly kingdom to which
          they had been admitted, and again delivered themselves up to
          defilement and perdition through the abominations of their former
          idolatry.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But soon after,
          the king of the Britons, Caedwalla,<a href="#note_285" id="noteref_285" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">285</span></span></a> the
          unrighteous instrument of rightful vengeance, slew them both.
          First, in the following summer, he put Osric to death; for, being
          rashly besieged by him in the municipal <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page135">[pg 135]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg135"/> town,<a href="#note_286" id="noteref_286" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">286</span></span></a> he
          sallied out on a sudden with all his forces, took him by surprise,
          and destroyed him and all his army. Then, when he had occupied the
          provinces of the Northumbrians for a whole year,<a href="#note_287" id="noteref_287" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">287</span></span></a> not
          ruling them like a victorious king, but ravaging them like a
          furious tyrant, he at length put an end to Eanfrid, in like manner,
          when he unadvisedly came to him with only twelve chosen soldiers,
          to sue for peace. To this day, that year is looked upon as
          ill-omened, and hateful to all good men; as well on account of the
          apostacy of the English kings, who had renounced the mysteries of
          the faith, as of the outrageous tyranny of the British king. Hence
          it has been generally agreed, in reckoning the dates of the kings,
          to abolish the memory of those faithless monarchs, and to assign
          that year to the reign of the following king, Oswald, a man beloved
          of God. This king, after the death of his brother Eanfrid,<a href="#note_288" id="noteref_288" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">288</span></span></a>
          advanced with an army, small, indeed, in number, but strengthened
          with the faith of Christ; and the impious commander of the Britons,
          in spite of his vast forces, which he boasted nothing could
          withstand, was slain at a place called in the English tongue
          Denisesburna, that is, the brook of Denis.<a href="#note_289" id="noteref_289" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">289</span></span></a></p>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page136">[pg 136]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg136"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc127"/> <a id="pdf128"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. II. How, among innumerable
          other miracles of healing wrought by the wood of the cross, which
          King Oswald, being ready to engage against the barbarians, erected,
          a certain man had his injured arm healed. [634</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The place is
          shown to this day, and held in much veneration, where Oswald, being
          about to engage in this battle, erected the symbol of the Holy
          Cross, and knelt down and prayed to God that he would send help
          from Heaven to his worshippers in their sore need. Then, we are
          told, that the cross being made in haste, and the hole dug in which
          it was to be set up, the king himself, in the ardour of his faith,
          laid hold of it and held it upright with both his hands, till the
          earth was heaped up by the soldiers and it was fixed. Thereupon,
          uplifting his voice, he cried to his whole army, <span class="tei tei-q">“Let us all kneel, and together beseech the true and
          living God Almighty in His mercy to defend us from the proud and
          cruel enemy; for He knows that we have undertaken a just war for
          the safety of our nation.”</span> All did as he had commanded, and
          accordingly advancing towards the enemy with the first dawn of day,
          they obtained the victory, as their faith deserved. In the place
          where they prayed very many miracles of healing are known to have
          been wrought, as a token and memorial of the king's faith; for even
          to this day, many are wont to cut off small splinters from the wood
          of the holy cross, and put them into water, which they give to sick
          men or cattle to drink, or they sprinkle them therewith, and these
          are presently restored to health.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The place is
          called in the English tongue Hefenfelth, or the Heavenly
          Field,<a href="#note_290" id="noteref_290" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">290</span></span></a> which
          name it undoubtedly received <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page137">[pg 137]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg137"/> of old as a presage of what was afterwards to
          happen, denoting, that the heavenly trophy was to be erected, the
          heavenly victory begun, and heavenly miracles shown forth to this
          day. The place is near the wall in the north which the Romans
          formerly drew across the whole of Britain from sea to sea, to
          restrain the onslaught of the barbarous nations, as has been said
          before. Hither also the brothers of the church of Hagustald,<a href="#note_291" id="noteref_291" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">291</span></span></a> which
          is not far distant, long ago made it their custom to resort every
          year, on the day before that on which King Oswald was afterwards
          slain, to keep vigils there for the health of his soul, and having
          sung many psalms of praise, to offer for him in the morning the
          sacrifice of the Holy Oblation. And since that good custom has
          spread, they have lately built a church there, which has attached
          additional sanctity and honour in the eyes of all men to that
          place;<a href="#note_292" id="noteref_292" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">292</span></span></a> and
          this with good reason; for it appears that there was no symbol of
          the Christian faith, no church, no altar erected throughout all the
          nation of the Bernicians, before that new leader in war, prompted
          by the zeal of his faith, set up this standard of the Cross as he
          was going to give battle to his barbarous enemy.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Nor is it
          foreign to our purpose to relate one of the many miracles that have
          been wrought at this cross. One of the brothers of the same church
          of Hagulstald, whose name is Bothelm, and who is still living, a
          few years ago, walking carelessly on the ice at night, suddenly
          fell and broke his arm; he was soon tormented with a most grievous
          pain in the broken part, so that he could not lift his arm to his
          mouth for the anguish. Hearing one morning that one of the brothers
          designed to go up to the place of the holy cross, he desired him,
          on his <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page138">[pg
          138]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg138"/>
          return, to bring him a piece of that sacred wood, saying, he
          believed that with the mercy of God he might thereby be healed. The
          brother did as he was desired; and returning in the evening, when
          the brothers were sitting at table, gave him some of the old moss
          which grew on the surface of the wood. As he sat at table, having
          no place to bestow the gift which was brought him, he put it into
          his bosom; and forgetting, when he went to bed, to put it away,
          left it in his bosom. Awaking in the middle of the night, he felt
          something cold lying by his side, and putting his hand upon it to
          feel what it was, he found his arm and hand as sound as if he had
          never felt any such pain.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc129"/> <a id="pdf130"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_III_Chap_III"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. III. How the same king Oswald,
          asking a bishop of the Scottish nation, had Aidan sent him, and
          granted him an episcopal see in the Isle of Lindisfarne.
          [635</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The same Oswald,
          as soon as he ascended the throne, being desirous that all the
          nation under his rule should be endued with the grace of the
          Christian faith, whereof he had found happy experience in
          vanquishing the barbarians, sent to the elders of the Scots,<a href="#note_293" id="noteref_293" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">293</span></span></a> among
          whom himself and his followers, when in banishment, had received
          the sacrament of Baptism, desiring that they would send him a
          bishop, by whose instruction and ministry the English nation, which
          he governed, might learn the privileges and receive the Sacraments
          of the faith of our Lord. Nor were they slow in granting his
          request; for they sent him Bishop Aidan, a man of singular
          gentleness, piety, and moderation; having a zeal of God, but not
          fully according to knowledge; for he was wont to keep Easter Sunday
          according to the custom of his country, which we have before so
          often mentioned,<a href="#note_294" id="noteref_294" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">294</span></span></a> from
          the fourteenth to the twentieth of the moon; the northern province
          of the Scots, and all the nation of the Picts, at <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page139">[pg 139]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg139"/> that time still celebrating Easter
          after that manner, and believing that in this observance they
          followed the writings of the holy and praiseworthy Father
          Anatolius.<a href="#note_295" id="noteref_295" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">295</span></span></a>
          Whether this be true, every instructed person can easily judge. But
          the Scots which dwelt in the South of Ireland had long since, by
          the admonition of the Bishop of the Apostolic see, learned to
          observe Easter according to the canonical custom.<a href="#note_296" id="noteref_296" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">296</span></span></a></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">On the arrival
          of the bishop, the king appointed him his episcopal see in the
          island of Lindisfarne,<a href="#note_297" id="noteref_297" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">297</span></span></a> as he
          desired. Which place, as the tide ebbs and flows, is twice a day
          enclosed by the waves of the sea like an island; and again, twice,
          when the beach is left dry, becomes contiguous with the land. The
          king also humbly and willingly in all things giving ear to his
          admonitions, industriously applied himself to build up and extend
          the Church of Christ in his kingdom; wherein, when the bishop, who
          was not perfectly skilled in the English tongue, preached the
          Gospel, it was a fair sight to see the king himself interpreting
          the Word of God to his ealdormen and thegns, for he had thoroughly
          learned the language of the Scots during his long banishment. From
          that time many came daily into Britain from the country of the
          Scots, and with great devotion preached the Word to those provinces
          of the English, over which King Oswald reigned, and those among
          them that had received <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page140">[pg
          140]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg140"/>
          priest's orders,<a href="#note_298" id="noteref_298" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">298</span></span></a>
          administered the grace of Baptism to the believers. Churches were
          built in divers places; the people joyfully flocked together to
          hear the Word; lands and other property were given of the king's
          bounty to found monasteries; English children, as well as their
          elders, were instructed by their Scottish teachers in study and the
          observance of monastic discipline. For most of those who came to
          preach were monks. Bishop Aidan was himself a monk, having been
          sent out from the island called Hii,<a href="#note_299" id="noteref_299" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">299</span></span></a>
          whereof the monastery was for a long time the chief of almost all
          those of the northern Scots,<a href="#note_300" id="noteref_300" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">300</span></span></a> and
          all those of the Picts, and had the direction of their people. That
          island belongs to Britain, being divided from it by a small arm of
          the sea, but had been long since given by the Picts, who inhabit
          those parts of Britain, to the Scottish monks, because they had
          received the faith of Christ through their preaching.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc131"/> <a id="pdf132"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_III_Chap_IV"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. IV. When the nation of the
          Picts received the faith of Christ. [565</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year of
          our Lord 565, when Justin, the younger, the successor of Justinian,
          obtained the government of the Roman empire, there came into
          Britain from Ireland a famous priest and abbot, marked as a monk by
          habit and manner of life, whose name was Columba,<a href="#note_301" id="noteref_301" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">301</span></span></a> to
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page141">[pg 141]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg141"/> preach the word of
          God to the provinces of the northern Picts, who are separated from
          the southern parts belonging to that nation by steep and rugged
          mountains. For the southern Picts, who dwell on this side of those
          mountains, had, it is said, long before forsaken the errors of
          idolatry, and received the true faith by the preaching of Bishop
          Ninias,<a href="#note_302" id="noteref_302" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">302</span></span></a> a
          most reverend and holy man of the British nation, who had been
          regularly instructed at Rome in the faith and mysteries of the
          truth; whose episcopal see, named after St. Martin the bishop, and
          famous for a church dedicated to him (wherein Ninias himself and
          many other saints rest in the body), is now in the possession of
          the English nation. The place belongs to the province of the
          Bernicians, and is commonly called the White House,<a href="#note_303" id="noteref_303" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">303</span></span></a>
          because he there <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page142">[pg
          142]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg142"/>
          built a church of stone, which was not usual among the Britons.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Columba came
          into Britain in the ninth year of the reign of Bridius, who was the
          son of Meilochon,<a href="#note_304" id="noteref_304" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">304</span></span></a> and
          the powerful king of the Pictish nation, and he converted that
          nation to the faith of Christ, by his preaching and example.
          Wherefore he also received of them the gift of the aforesaid island
          whereon to found a monastery. It is not a large island, but
          contains about five families, according to the English computation;
          his successors hold it to this day; he was also buried therein,
          having died at the age of seventy-seven, about thirty-two years
          after he came into Britain to preach.<a href="#note_305" id="noteref_305" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">305</span></span></a>
          Before he crossed over into Britain, he had built a famous
          monastery in Ireland, which, from the great number of oaks, is in
          the Scottish tongue called Dearmach—The Field of Oaks.<a href="#note_306" id="noteref_306" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">306</span></span></a> From
          both these monasteries, many others had their beginning through his
          disciples, both in Britain and Ireland; but the island monastery
          where his body lies, has the pre-eminence among them all.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">That island has
          for its ruler an abbot, who is a priest, to whose jurisdiction all
          the province, and even the bishops, contrary to the usual method,
          are bound to be subject, according to the example of their first
          teacher, who was not a bishop, but a priest and monk;<a href="#note_307" id="noteref_307" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">307</span></span></a> of
          whose <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page143">[pg 143]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg143"/> life and discourses
          some records are said to be preserved by his disciples. But
          whatsoever he was himself, this we know for certain concerning him,
          that he left successors renowned for their continence, their love
          of God, and observance of monastic rules. It is true they employed
          doubtful cycles in fixing the time of the great festival, as having
          none to bring them the synodal decrees for the observance of
          Easter, by reason of their being so far away from the rest of the
          world; but they earnestly practised such works of piety and
          chastity as they could learn from the Prophets, the Gospels and the
          Apostolic writings. This manner of keeping Easter continued among
          them no little time, to wit, for the space of 150 years, till the
          year of our Lord 715.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But then the
          most reverend and holy father and priest, Egbert,<a href="#note_308" id="noteref_308" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">308</span></span></a> of
          the English nation, who had long lived in banishment in Ireland for
          the sake of Christ, and was most learned in the Scriptures, and
          renowned for long perfection of life, came among them, corrected
          their error, and led them to observe the true and canonical day of
          Easter; which, nevertheless, they did not always keep on the
          fourteenth of the moon with the Jews, as some imagined, but on
          Sunday, although not in the proper week.<a href="#note_309" id="noteref_309" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">309</span></span></a> For,
          as Christians, they knew that the Resurrection of our Lord, which
          happened on the first day of the week, was always to be celebrated
          on the first day of the week; but being rude and barbarous, they
          had not learned when that same first day after the Sabbath, which
          is now called the Lord's day, should come. But because they had not
          failed in the grace of fervent charity, they were accounted worthy
          to receive the full <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page144">[pg
          144]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg144"/>
          knowledge of this matter also, according to the promise of the
          Apostle, <span class="tei tei-q">“And if in any thing ye be
          otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto
          you.”</span><a href="#note_310" id="noteref_310" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">310</span></span></a> Of
          which we shall speak more fully hereafter in its proper place.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc133"/> <a id="pdf134"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. V. Of the life of Bishop Aidan.
          [635</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">From this
          island, then, and the fraternity of these monks, Aidan was sent to
          instruct the English nation in Christ, having received the dignity
          of a bishop. At that time Segeni,<a href="#note_311" id="noteref_311" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">311</span></span></a> abbot
          and priest, presided over that monastery. Among other lessons in
          holy living, Aidan left the clergy a most salutary example of
          abstinence and continence; it was the highest commendation of his
          doctrine with all men, that he taught nothing that he did not
          practise in his life among his brethren; for he neither sought nor
          loved anything of this world, but delighted in distributing
          immediately among the poor whom he met whatsoever was given him by
          the kings or rich men of the world. He was wont to traverse both
          town and country on foot, never on horseback, unless compelled by
          some urgent necessity; to the end that, as he went, he might turn
          aside to any whomsoever he saw, whether rich or poor, and call upon
          them, if infidels, to receive the mystery of the faith, or, if they
          were believers, strengthen them in the faith, and stir them up by
          words and actions to giving of alms and the performance of good
          works.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">His course of
          life was so different from the slothfulness of our times, that all
          those who bore him company, whether they were tonsured or laymen,
          had to study either reading the Scriptures, or learning psalms.
          This was the daily employment of himself and all that were with
          him, wheresoever they went; and if it happened, which was but
          seldom, that he was invited to the king's <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page145">[pg 145]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg145"/> table, he went with one or two clerks, and
          having taken a little food, made haste to be gone, either to read
          with his brethren or to pray. At that time, many religious men and
          women, led by his example, adopted the custom of prolonging their
          fast on Wednesdays and Fridays, till the ninth hour, throughout the
          year, except during the fifty days after Easter. Never, through
          fear or respect of persons, did he keep silence with regard to the
          sins of the rich; but was wont to correct them with a severe
          rebuke. He never gave money to the powerful men of the world, but
          only food, if he happened to entertain them; and, on the contrary,
          whatsoever gifts of money he received from the rich, he either
          distributed, as has been said, for the use of the poor, or bestowed
          in ransoming such as had been wrongfully sold for slaves. Moreover,
          he afterwards made many of those he had ransomed his disciples, and
          after having taught and instructed them, advanced them to priest's
          orders.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">It is said, that
          when King Oswald had asked a bishop of the Scots to administer the
          Word of faith to him and his nation, there was first sent to him
          another man of more harsh disposition,<a href="#note_312" id="noteref_312" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">312</span></span></a> who,
          after preaching for some time to the English and meeting with no
          success, not being gladly heard by the people, returned home, and
          in an assembly of the elders reported, that he had not been able to
          do any good by his teaching to the nation to whom he had been sent,
          because they were intractable men, and of a stubborn and barbarous
          disposition. They then, it is said, held a council and seriously
          debated what was to be done, being desirous that the nation should
          obtain the salvation it demanded, but grieving that they had not
          received the preacher sent to them. Then said Aidan, who was also
          present in the council, to the priest in question, <span class="tei tei-q">“Methinks, brother, that you were more severe to your
          unlearned hearers than you ought to have been, and did not at
          first, conformably to the Apostolic rule, give them the milk of
          more easy doctrine, till, being by degrees nourished with the Word
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page146">[pg 146]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg146"/> of God, they should
          be capable of receiving that which is more perfect and of
          performing the higher precepts of God.”</span> Having heard these
          words, all present turned their attention to him and began
          diligently to weigh what he had said, and they decided that he was
          worthy to be made a bishop, and that he was the man who ought to be
          sent to instruct the unbelieving and unlearned; since he was found
          to be endued preeminently with the grace of discretion, which is
          the mother of the virtues. So they ordained him and sent him forth
          to preach; and, as time went on, his other virtues became apparent,
          as well as that temperate discretion which had marked him at
          first.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc135"/> <a id="pdf136"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_III_Chap_VI"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. VI. Of King Oswald's wonderful
          piety and religion. [635-642</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">King Oswald,
          with the English nation which he governed, being instructed by the
          teaching of this bishop, not only learned to hope for a heavenly
          kingdom unknown to his fathers, but also obtained of the one God,
          Who made heaven and earth, a greater earthly kingdom than any of
          his ancestors. In brief, he brought under his dominion all the
          nations and provinces of Britain, which are divided into four
          languages, to wit, those of the Britons, the Picts, the Scots, and
          the English.<a href="#note_313" id="noteref_313" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">313</span></span></a>
          Though raised to that height of regal power, wonderful to relate,
          he was always humble, kind, and generous to the poor and to
          strangers.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">To give one
          instance, it is told, that when he was once sitting at dinner, on
          the holy day of Easter, with the aforesaid bishop, and a silver
          dish full of royal dainties was set before him, and they were just
          about to put forth their hands to bless the bread, the servant,
          whom he had appointed to relieve the needy, came in on a sudden,
          and told the king, that a great multitude of poor folk from all
          parts was sitting in the streets begging alms of <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page147">[pg 147]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg147"/> the king; he immediately ordered the
          meat set before him to be carried to the poor, and the dish to be
          broken in pieces and divided among them. At which sight, the bishop
          who sat by him, greatly rejoicing at such an act of piety, clasped
          his right hand and said, <span class="tei tei-q">“May this hand
          never decay.”</span> This fell out according to his prayer, for his
          hands with the arms being cut off from his body, when he was slain
          in battle, remain uncorrupted to this day, and are kept in a silver
          shrine, as revered relics, in St. Peter's church in the royal
          city,<a href="#note_314" id="noteref_314" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">314</span></span></a> which
          has taken its name from Bebba, one of its former queens. Through
          this king's exertions the provinces of the Deiri and the
          Bernicians, which till then had been at variance, were peacefully
          united and moulded into one people. He was nephew to King Edwin
          through his sister Acha; and it was fit that so great a predecessor
          should have in his own family such an one to succeed him in his
          religion and sovereignty.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc137"/> <a id="pdf138"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_III_Chap_VII"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. VII. How the West Saxons
          received the Word of God by the preaching of Birinus; and of his
          successors, Agilbert and Leutherius. [635-670</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At that time,
          the West Saxons, formerly called Gewissae,<a href="#note_315" id="noteref_315" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">315</span></span></a> in
          the reign of Cynegils,<a href="#note_316" id="noteref_316" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">316</span></span></a>
          received the faith of Christ, through the preaching of Bishop
          Birinus,<a href="#note_317" id="noteref_317" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">317</span></span></a> who
          came into Britain by the counsel of Pope Honorius;<a href="#note_318" id="noteref_318" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">318</span></span></a>
          having promised in his presence that he would sow the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page148">[pg 148]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg148"/> seed of the holy faith in the farthest
          inland regions of the English, where no other teacher had been
          before him. Hereupon at the bidding of the Pope he received
          episcopal consecration from Asterius, bishop of Genoa;<a href="#note_319" id="noteref_319" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">319</span></span></a> but
          on his arrival in Britain, he first came to the nation of the
          Gewissae, and finding all in that place confirmed pagans, he
          thought it better to preach the Word there, than to proceed further
          to seek for other hearers of his preaching.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Now, as he was
          spreading the Gospel in the aforesaid province, it happened that
          when the king himself, having received instruction as a catechumen,
          was being baptized together with his people, Oswald, the most holy
          and victorious king of the Northumbrians, being present, received
          him as he came forth from baptism, and by an honourable alliance
          most acceptable to God, first adopted as his son, thus born again
          and dedicated to God, the man whose daughter<a href="#note_320" id="noteref_320" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">320</span></span></a> he
          was about to receive in marriage. The two kings gave to the bishop
          the city called Dorcic,<a href="#note_321" id="noteref_321" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">321</span></span></a> there
          to establish his episcopal see; where having built and consecrated
          churches, and by his pious labours called many to the Lord, he
          departed to the Lord, and was buried in the same city; but many
          years after, when Haedde was bishop,<a href="#note_322" id="noteref_322" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">322</span></span></a> he
          was translated <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page149">[pg
          149]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg149"/>
          thence to the city of Venta,<a href="#note_323" id="noteref_323" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">323</span></span></a> and
          laid in the church of the blessed Apostles, Peter and Paul.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">When the king
          died, his son Coinwalch<a href="#note_324" id="noteref_324" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">324</span></span></a>
          succeeded him on the throne, but refused to receive the faith and
          the mysteries of the heavenly kingdom; and not long after he lost
          also the dominion of his earthly kingdom; for he put away the
          sister of Penda, king of the Mercians, whom he had married, and
          took another wife; whereupon a war ensuing, he was by him deprived
          of his kingdom, and withdrew to Anna, king of the East Angles,
          where he lived three years in banishment, and learned and received
          the true faith; for the king, with whom he lived in his banishment,
          was a good man, and happy in a good and saintly offspring, as we
          shall show hereafter.<a href="#note_325" id="noteref_325" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">325</span></span></a></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But when
          Coinwalch was restored to his kingdom, there came into that
          province out of Ireland, a certain bishop called Agilbert,<a href="#note_326" id="noteref_326" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">326</span></span></a> a
          native of Gaul, but who had then lived a long time in Ireland, for
          the purpose of reading the Scriptures. He attached himself to the
          king, and voluntarily undertook the ministry of preaching. The
          king, observing his learning and industry, desired him to accept an
          episcopal see there and remain as the bishop of his people.
          Agilbert complied with the request, and <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page150">[pg 150]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg150"/> presided over that nation as their bishop for
          many years. At length the king, who understood only the language of
          the Saxons, weary of his barbarous tongue, privately brought into
          the province another bishop, speaking his own language, by name
          Wini,<a href="#note_327" id="noteref_327" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">327</span></span></a> who
          had also been ordained in Gaul; and dividing his province into two
          dioceses, appointed this last his episcopal see in the city of
          Venta, by the Saxons called Wintancaestir.<a href="#note_328" id="noteref_328" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">328</span></span></a>
          Agilbert, being highly offended, that the king should do this
          without consulting him, returned into Gaul, and being made bishop
          of the city of Paris, died there, being old and full of days. Not
          many years after his departure out of Britain, Wini was also
          expelled from his bishopric by the same king, and took refuge with
          Wulfhere, king of the Mercians, of whom he purchased for money the
          see of the city of London,<a href="#note_329" id="noteref_329" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">329</span></span></a> and
          remained bishop thereof till his death. Thus the province of the
          West Saxons continued no small time without a bishop.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">During which
          time, the aforesaid king of that nation, sustaining repeatedly very
          great losses in his kingdom from his enemies, at length bethought
          himself, that as he had been before expelled from the throne for
          his unbelief, he had been restored when he acknowledged the faith
          of Christ; and he perceived that his kingdom, being deprived of a
          bishop, was justly deprived also of the Divine protection. He,
          therefore, sent messengers into Gaul to Agilbert, with humble
          apologies entreating him to return to the bishopric of his nation.
          But he excused himself, and protested that he could not go, because
          he was bound to the bishopric of his own city and diocese;
          notwithstanding, in order to give him some help in answer to his
          earnest request, he sent thither in his stead the priest
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page151">[pg 151]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg151"/> Leutherius,<a href="#note_330" id="noteref_330" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">330</span></span></a> his
          nephew, to be ordained as his bishop, if he thought fit, saying
          that he thought him worthy of a bishopric. The king and the people
          received him honourably, and asked Theodore, then Archbishop of
          Canterbury, to consecrate him as their bishop. He was accordingly
          consecrated in the same city, and many years diligently governed
          the whole bishopric of the West Saxons by synodical authority.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc139"/> <a id="pdf140"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_III_Chap_VIII"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. VIII. How Earconbert, King of
          Kent, ordered the idols to be destroyed; and of his daughter
          Earcongota, and his kinswoman Ethelberg, virgins consecrated to
          God. [640</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year of
          our Lord 640, Eadbald,<a href="#note_331" id="noteref_331" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">331</span></span></a> king
          of Kent, departed this life, and left his kingdom to his son
          Earconbert, who governed it most nobly twenty-four years and some
          months. He was the first of the English kings that of his supreme
          authority commanded the idols throughout his whole kingdom to be
          forsaken and destroyed, and the fast of forty days to be observed;
          and that the same might not be lightly neglected, he appointed
          fitting and condign punishments for the offenders. His daughter
          Earcongota, as became the offspring of such a parent, was a most
          virtuous virgin, serving God in a monastery in the country of the
          Franks, built by a most noble abbess, named Fara, at a place called
          In Brige;<a href="#note_332" id="noteref_332" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">332</span></span></a> for
          at that time but few monasteries had been built in the country of
          the Angles, and many were wont, for the sake of monastic life, to
          repair to the monasteries of the Franks or Gauls; and they also
          sent <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page152">[pg 152]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg152"/> their daughters
          there to be instructed, and united to their Heavenly Bridegroom,
          especially in the monasteries of Brige, of Cale,<a href="#note_333" id="noteref_333" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">333</span></span></a> and
          Andilegum.<a href="#note_334" id="noteref_334" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">334</span></span></a> Among
          whom was also Saethryth,<a href="#note_335" id="noteref_335" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">335</span></span></a>
          daughter of the wife of Anna, king of the East Angles, above
          mentioned; and Ethelberg,<a href="#note_336" id="noteref_336" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">336</span></span></a> the
          king's own daughter; both of whom, though strangers, were for their
          virtue made abbesses of the monastery of Brige. Sexburg,<a href="#note_337" id="noteref_337" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">337</span></span></a> that
          king's elder daughter, wife to Earconbert, king of Kent, had a
          daughter called Earcongota,<a href="#note_338" id="noteref_338" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">338</span></span></a> of
          whom we are about to speak.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Many wonderful
          works and miracles of this virgin, dedicated to God, are to this
          day related by the inhabitants of that place; but for us it shall
          suffice to say something briefly of her departure out of this world
          to the heavenly kingdom. The day of her summoning drawing near, she
          began to visit in the monastery the cells of the infirm handmaidens
          of Christ, and particularly those that were of a great age, or most
          noted for their virtuous life, and humbly commending herself to
          their prayers, she let them know that her death was at hand, as she
          had learnt by revelation, which she said she had received in this
          manner. She had seen a band of men, clothed in white, come into the
          monastery, and being asked by her what they wanted, and what they
          did there, they answered, <span class="tei tei-q">“They had been
          sent thither to carry away with them the gold coin that had been
          brought thither from Kent.”</span> Towards the close of that same
          night, as morning began to dawn, leaving the darkness of this
          world, she departed to the light of heaven. Many of the brethren of
          that monastery who were in other houses, declared they had then
          plainly heard choirs of singing angels, and, as it were, the sound
          of a multitude entering the monastery. Whereupon going out
          immediately to see what it might be, they beheld a great light
          coming down from heaven, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page153">[pg
          153]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg153"/>
          which bore that holy soul, set loose from the bonds of the flesh,
          to the eternal joys of the celestial country. They also tell of
          other miracles that were wrought that night in the same monastery
          by the power of God; but as we must proceed to other matters, we
          leave them to be related by those whose concern they are. The body
          of this venerable virgin and bride of Christ was buried in the
          church of the blessed protomartyr, Stephen. It was thought fit,
          three days after, to take up the stone that covered the tomb, and
          to raise it higher in the same place, and whilst they were doing
          this, so sweet a fragrance rose from below, that it seemed to all
          the brethren and sisters there present, as if a store of balsam had
          been opened.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Her aunt also,
          Ethelberg, of whom we have spoken, preserved the glory, acceptable
          to God, of perpetual virginity, in a life of great self-denial, but
          the extent of her virtue became more conspicuous after her death.
          Whilst she was abbess, she began to build in her monastery a
          church, in honour of all the Apostles, wherein she desired that her
          body should be buried; but when that work was advanced half way,
          she was prevented by death from finishing it, and was buried in the
          place in the church which she had chosen. After her death, the
          brothers occupied themselves with other things, and this structure
          was left untouched for seven years, at the expiration whereof they
          resolved, by reason of the greatness of the work, wholly to abandon
          the building of the church, and to remove the abbess's bones thence
          to some other church that was finished and consecrated. On opening
          her tomb, they found the body as untouched by decay as it had been
          free from the corruption of carnal concupiscence, and having washed
          it again and clothed it in other garments, they removed it to the
          church of the blessed Stephen, the Martyr. And her festival is wont
          to be celebrated there with much honour on the 7th of July.</p>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page154">[pg 154]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg154"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc141"/> <a id="pdf142"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_III_Chap_IX"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. IX. How miracles of healing
          have been frequently wrought in the place where King Oswald was
          killed; and how, first, a traveller's horse was restored and
          afterwards a young girl cured of the palsy. [642</span>
<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Oswald, the most
          Christian king of the Northumbrians, reigned nine years, including
          that year which was held accursed for the barbarous cruelty of the
          king of the Britons and the reckless apostacy of the English kings;
          for, as was said above,<a href="#note_339" id="noteref_339" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">339</span></span></a> it is
          agreed by the unanimous consent of all, that the names and memory
          of the apostates should be erased from the catalogue of the
          Christian kings, and no year assigned to their reign. After which
          period, Oswald was killed in a great battle, by the same pagan
          nation and pagan king of the Mercians, who had slain his
          predecessor Edwin, at a place called in the English tongue
          Maserfelth,<a href="#note_340" id="noteref_340" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">340</span></span></a> in
          the thirty-eighth year of his age, on the fifth day of the month of
          August.<a href="#note_341" id="noteref_341" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">341</span></span></a></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">How great his
          faith was towards God, and how remarkable his devotion, has been
          made evident by miracles even after his death; for, in the place
          where he was killed by the pagans, fighting for his country, sick
          men and cattle are frequently healed to this day. Whence it came to
          pass that many took up the very dust of the place where his body
          fell, and putting it into water, brought much relief with it to
          their friends who were sick. This custom came so much into use,
          that the earth being carried away by degrees, a hole was made as
          deep as the height of a man. Nor is it surprising that the sick
          should be healed in the place where he died; for, whilst he lived,
          he never ceased to provide for the poor and the sick, and to bestow
          alms on them, and assist them. <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page155">[pg 155]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg155"/> Many miracles are said to have been wrought
          in that place, or with the dust carried from it; but we have
          thought it sufficient to mention two, which we have heard from our
          elders.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">It happened, not
          long after his death, that a man was travelling on horseback near
          that place, when his horse on a sudden fell sick, stood still, hung
          his head, and foamed at the mouth, and, at length, as his pain
          increased, he fell to the ground; the rider dismounted, and taking
          off his saddle,<a href="#note_342" id="noteref_342" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">342</span></span></a>
          waited to see whether the beast would recover or die. At length,
          after writhing for a long time in extreme anguish, the horse
          happened in his struggles to come to the very place where the great
          king died. Immediately the pain abated, the beast ceased from his
          frantic kicking, and, after the manner of horses, as if resting
          from his weariness, he rolled from side to side, and then starting
          up, perfectly recovered, began to graze hungrily on the green
          herbage. The rider observing this, and being an intelligent man,
          concluded that there must be some wonderful sanctity in the place
          where the horse had been healed, and he marked the spot. After
          which he again mounted his horse, and went on to the inn where he
          intended to stop. On his arrival he found a girl, niece to the
          landlord, who had long been sick of the palsy; and when the members
          of the household, in his presence, lamented the girl's grievous
          calamity, he gave them an account of the place where his horse had
          been cured. In brief, she was put into a wagon and carried to the
          place and laid down there. At first she slept awhile, and when she
          awoke, found herself healed of her infirmity. Upon which she called
          for water, washed her face, arranged her hair, put a kerchief on
          her head, and returned home on foot, in good health, with those who
          had brought her.</p>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page156">[pg 156]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg156"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc143"/> <a id="pdf144"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. X. How the dust of that place
          prevailed against fire. [After 642</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">About the same
          time, another traveller, a Briton, as is reported, happened to pass
          by the same place, where the aforesaid battle was fought. Observing
          one particular spot of ground greener and more beautiful than any
          other part of the field, he had the wisdom to infer that the cause
          of the unusual greenness in that place must be that some person of
          greater holiness than any other in the army had been killed there.
          He therefore took along with him some of the dust of that piece of
          ground, tying it up in a linen cloth, supposing, as was indeed the
          case, that it would be of use for curing sick people, and
          proceeding on his journey, came in the evening to a certain
          village, and entered a house where the villagers were feasting at
          supper. Being received by the owners of the house, he sat down with
          them at the entertainment, hanging the cloth, with the dust which
          he had carried in it, on a post in the wall. They sat long at
          supper and drank deep. Now there was a great fire in the middle of
          the room, and it happened that the sparks flew up and caught the
          roof of the house, which being made of wattles and thatch, was
          suddenly wrapped in flames; the guests ran out in panic and
          confusion, but they were not able to save the burning house, which
          was rapidly being destroyed. Wherefore the house was burnt down,
          and only that post on which the dust hung in the linen cloth
          remained safe and untouched by the fire. When they beheld this
          miracle, they were all amazed, and inquiring into it diligently,
          learned that the dust had been taken from the place where the blood
          of King Oswald had been shed. These wonderful works being made
          known and reported abroad, many began daily to resort to that
          place, and received the blessing of health for themselves and their
          friends.</p>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page157">[pg 157]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg157"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc145"/> <a id="pdf146"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_III_Chap_XI"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XI. How a light from Heaven
          stood all night over his relics, and how those possessed with
          devils were healed by them. [679-697</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Among the rest,
          I think we ought not to pass over in silence the miracles and signs
          from Heaven that were shown when King Oswald's bones were found,
          and translated into the church where they are now preserved. This
          was done by the zealous care of Osthryth, queen of the
          Mercians,<a href="#note_343" id="noteref_343" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">343</span></span></a> the
          daughter of his brother Oswy, who reigned after him, as shall be
          said hereafter.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">There is a
          famous monastery in the province of Lindsey, called
          Beardaneu,<a href="#note_344" id="noteref_344" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">344</span></span></a> which
          that queen and her husband Ethelred greatly loved and venerated,
          conferring upon it many honours. It was here that she was desirous
          to lay the revered bones of her uncle. When the wagon in which
          those bones were carried arrived towards evening at the aforesaid
          monastery, they that were in it were unwilling to admit them,
          because, though they knew him to be a holy man, yet, as he was a
          native of another province, and had obtained the sovereignty over
          them, they retained their ancient aversion to him even after his
          death. Thus it came to pass that the relics were left in the open
          air all that night, with only a large tent spread over the wagon
          which contained them. But it was revealed by a sign from Heaven
          with how much reverence they ought to be received by all the
          faithful; for all that night, a pillar of light, reaching from the
          wagon up to heaven, was visible in almost every part of the
          province of Lindsey. Hereupon, in the morning, the brethren of that
          monastery who had refused it the day before, began themselves
          earnestly to pray that those holy relics, beloved of God, might be
          laid among them. Accordingly, the bones, being washed, were put
          into a shrine which they had made for that purpose, and placed
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page158">[pg 158]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg158"/> in the church, with
          due honour; and that there might be a perpetual memorial of the
          royal character of this holy man, they hung up over the monument
          his banner of gold and purple. Then they poured out the water in
          which they had washed the bones, in a corner of the cemetery.<a href="#note_345" id="noteref_345" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">345</span></span></a> From
          that time, the very earth which received that holy water, had the
          power of saving grace in casting out devils from the bodies of
          persons possessed.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Lastly, when the
          aforesaid queen afterwards abode some time in that monastery, there
          came to visit her a certain venerable abbess, who is still living,
          called Ethelhild, the sister of the holy men, Ethelwin<a href="#note_346" id="noteref_346" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">346</span></span></a> and
          Aldwin, the first of whom was bishop in the province of Lindsey,
          the other abbot of the monastery of Peartaneu;<a href="#note_347" id="noteref_347" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">347</span></span></a> not
          far from which was the monastery of Ethelhild. When this lady was
          come, in a conversation between her and the queen, the discourse,
          among other things, turning upon Oswald, she said, that she also
          had that night seen the light over his relics reaching up to
          heaven. The queen thereupon added, that the very dust of the
          pavement on which the water that washed the bones had been poured
          out, had already healed many sick persons. The abbess thereupon
          desired that some of that health-bringing dust might be given her,
          and, receiving it, she tied it up in a cloth, and, putting it into
          a casket, returned home. Some time after, when she was in her
          monastery, there came to it a guest, who was wont often in the
          night to be on a sudden grievously tormented with an unclean
          spirit; he being hospitably entertained, when he had gone to bed
          after supper, was suddenly seized by the Devil, and began to cry
          out, to gnash his teeth, to foam at the mouth, and to writhe and
          distort his limbs. None being able to hold or bind him, the servant
          ran, and knocking at the door, told <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page159">[pg 159]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg159"/> the abbess. She, opening the monastery door,
          went out herself with one of the nuns to the men's apartment, and
          calling a priest, desired that he would go with her to the
          sufferer. Being come thither, and seeing many present, who had not
          been able, by their efforts, to hold the tormented person and
          restrain his convulsive movements, the priest used exorcisms, and
          did all that he could to assuage the madness of the unfortunate
          man, but, though he took much pains, he could not prevail. When no
          hope appeared of easing him in his ravings, the abbess bethought
          herself of the dust, and immediately bade her handmaiden go and
          fetch her the casket in which it was. As soon as she came with it,
          as she had been bidden, and was entering the hall of the house, in
          the inner part whereof the possessed person was writhing in
          torment, he suddenly became silent, and laid down his head, as if
          he had been falling asleep, stretching out all his limbs to rest.
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Silence fell upon all and intent they
          gazed,”</span><a href="#note_348" id="noteref_348" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">348</span></span></a>
          anxiously waiting to see the end of the matter. And after about the
          space of an hour the man that had been tormented sat up, and
          fetching a deep sigh, said, <span class="tei tei-q">“Now I am
          whole, for I am restored to my senses.”</span> They earnestly
          inquired how that came to pass, and he answered, <span class="tei tei-q">“As soon as that maiden drew near the hall of this
          house, with the casket she brought, all the evil spirits that vexed
          me departed and left me, and were no more to be seen.”</span> Then
          the abbess gave him a little of that dust, and the priest having
          prayed, he passed that night in great peace; nor was he, from that
          time forward, alarmed by night, or in any way troubled by his old
          enemy.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc147"/> <a id="pdf148"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_III_Chap_XII"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XII. How a little boy was cured
          of a fever at his tomb.</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Some time after,
          there was a certain little boy in the said monastery, who had been
          long grievously troubled with <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page160">[pg 160]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg160"/> a fever; he was one day anxiously expecting
          the hour when his fit was to come on, when one of the brothers,
          coming in to him, said, <span class="tei tei-q">“Shall I tell you,
          my son, how you may be cured of this sickness? Rise, enter the
          church, and go close to Oswald's tomb; sit down and stay there
          quiet and do not leave it; do not come away, or stir from the
          place, till the time is past, when the fever leaves you: then I
          will go in and fetch you away.”</span> The boy did as he was
          advised, and the disease durst not assail him as he sat by the
          saint's tomb; but fled in such fear that it did not dare to touch
          him, either the second or third day, or ever after. The brother
          that came from thence, and told me this, added, that at the time
          when he was talking with me, the young man was then still living in
          the monastery, on whom, when a boy, that miracle of healing had
          been wrought. Nor need we wonder that the prayers of that king who
          is now reigning with our Lord, should be very efficacious with Him,
          since he, whilst yet governing his temporal kingdom, was always
          wont to pray and labour more for that which is eternal. Nay, it is
          said, that he often continued in prayer from the hour of morning
          thanksgiving<a href="#note_349" id="noteref_349" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">349</span></span></a> till
          it was day; and that by reason of his constant custom of praying or
          giving thanks to God, he was wont always, wherever he sat, to hold
          his hands on his knees with the palms turned upwards. It is also
          commonly affirmed and has passed into a proverb, that he ended his
          life in prayer; for when he was beset with the weapons of his
          enemies, and perceived that death was at hand, he prayed for the
          souls of his army. Whence it is proverbially said, <span class="tei tei-q">“ <span class="tei tei-q">‘Lord have mercy on their
          souls,’</span> said Oswald, as he fell to the ground.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Now his bones
          were translated to the monastery which we have mentioned, and
          buried therein: but the king who slew him commanded his head, and
          hands, with the arms, to be cut off from the body, and set upon
          stakes. But his successor in the throne, Oswy, coming thither the
          next year with his army, took them down, and buried <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page161">[pg 161]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg161"/> his head in the cemetery of the church
          of Lindisfarne,<a href="#note_350" id="noteref_350" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">350</span></span></a> and
          the hands and arms in his royal city.<a href="#note_351" id="noteref_351" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">351</span></span></a></p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc149"/> <a id="pdf150"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_III_Chap_XIII"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XIII. How a certain person in
          Ireland was restored, when at the point of death, by his
          relics.</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Nor was the fame
          of the renowned Oswald confined to Britain, but, spreading rays of
          healing light even beyond the sea, reached also to Germany and
          Ireland. For the most reverend prelate, Acca,<a href="#note_352" id="noteref_352" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">352</span></span></a> is
          wont to relate, that when, in his journey to Rome,<a href="#note_353" id="noteref_353" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">353</span></span></a> he
          and his bishop Wilfrid stayed some time with Wilbrord,<a href="#note_354" id="noteref_354" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">354</span></span></a> the
          holy archbishop of the Frisians, he often heard him tell of the
          wonders which had been wrought in that province at the relics of
          that most worshipful king. And he used to say that in Ireland,
          when, being yet only a priest, he led the life of a stranger and
          pilgrim for love of the eternal country, the fame of that king's
          sanctity was already spread far and near in that island also. One
          of the miracles, among the rest, which he related, we have thought
          fit to insert in this our history.</p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page162">[pg 162]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg162"/>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“At the time,”</span> said he, <span class="tei tei-q">“of the plague which made such widespread havoc in
          Britain and Ireland, among others, a certain scholar of the
          Scottish race was smitten with the disease, a man learned in the
          study of letters, but in no way careful or studious of his eternal
          salvation; who, seeing his death near at hand, began to fear and
          tremble lest, as soon as he was dead, he should be hurried away to
          the prison-house of Hell for his sins. He called me, for I was
          near, and trembling and sighing in his weakness, with a lamentable
          voice made his complaint to me, after this manner: <span class="tei tei-q">‘You see that my bodily distress increases, and that I
          am now reduced to the point of death. Nor do I question but that
          after the death of my body, I shall be immediately snatched away to
          the everlasting death of my soul, and cast into the torments of
          hell, since for a long time, amidst all my reading of divine books,
          I have suffered myself to be ensnared by sin, instead of keeping
          the commandments of God. But it is my resolve, if the Divine Mercy
          shall grant me a new term of life, to correct my sinful habits, and
          wholly to devote anew my mind and life to obedience to the Divine
          will. But I know that I have no merits of my own whereby to obtain
          a prolongation of life, nor can I hope to have it, unless it shall
          please God to forgive me, wretched and unworthy of pardon as I am,
          through the help of those who have faithfully served him. We have
          heard, and the report is widespread, that there was in your nation
          a king, of wonderful sanctity, called Oswald, the excellency of
          whose faith and virtue has been made famous even after his death by
          the working of many miracles. I beseech you, if you have any relics
          of his in your keeping, that you will bring them to me; if haply
          the Lord shall be pleased, through his merits, to have mercy on
          me.’</span> I answered, <span class="tei tei-q">‘I have indeed a
          part of the stake on which his head was set up by the pagans, when
          he was killed, and if you believe with steadfast heart, the Divine
          mercy may, through the merits of so great a man, both grant you a
          longer term of life here, and render you worthy to be admitted into
          eternal life.’</span> He answered immediately <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page163">[pg 163]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg163"/> that he had entire faith therein. Then
          I blessed some water, and put into it a splinter of the aforesaid
          oak, and gave it to the sick man to drink. He presently found ease,
          and, recovering of his sickness, lived a long time after; and,
          being entirely converted to God in heart and deed, wherever he
          went, he spoke of the goodness of his merciful Creator, and the
          honour of His faithful servant.”</span></p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc151"/> <a id="pdf152"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_III_Chap_XIV"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XIV. How on the death of
          Paulinus, Ithamar was made bishop of Rochester in his stead; and of
          the wonderful humility of King Oswin, who was cruelly slain by
          Oswy. [644-651</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Oswald being
          translated to the heavenly kingdom, his brother Oswy,<a href="#note_355" id="noteref_355" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">355</span></span></a> a
          young man of about thirty years of age, succeeded him on the throne
          of his earthly kingdom, and held it twenty-eight years with much
          trouble, being attacked by the pagan nation of the Mercians, that
          had slain his brother, as also by his son Alchfrid,<a href="#note_356" id="noteref_356" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">356</span></span></a> and
          by his nephew Oidilwald,<a href="#note_357" id="noteref_357" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">357</span></span></a> the
          son of his brother who reigned before him. In his second year, that
          is, in the year of our Lord 644, the most reverend Father Paulinus,
          formerly Bishop of York, but at that time Bishop of the city of
          Rochester, departed to the Lord, on the 10th day of October, having
          held the office of a bishop nineteen years, two months, and
          twenty-one days; and was buried in the sacristy of the blessed
          Apostle Andrew,<a href="#note_358" id="noteref_358" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">358</span></span></a> which
          King Ethelbert had built from the foundation, in the same city of
          Rochester. In his place, Archbishop Honorius <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page164">[pg 164]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg164"/> ordained Ithamar,<a href="#note_359" id="noteref_359" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">359</span></span></a> of
          the Kentish nation, but not inferior to his predecessors in
          learning and conduct of life.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Oswy, during the
          first part of his reign, had a partner in the royal dignity called
          Oswin, of the race of King Edwin, and son to Osric<a href="#note_360" id="noteref_360" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">360</span></span></a> of
          whom we have spoken above, a man of wonderful piety and devotion,
          who governed the province of the Deiri seven years in very great
          prosperity, and was himself beloved by all men. But Oswy, who
          governed all the other northern part of the nation beyond the
          Humber, that is, the province of the Bernicians, could not live at
          peace with him; and at last, when the causes of their disagreement
          increased, he murdered him most cruelly. For when each had raised
          an army against the other, Oswin perceived that he could not
          maintain a war against his enemy who had more auxiliaries than
          himself, and he thought it better at that time to lay aside all
          thoughts of engaging, and to reserve himself for better times. He
          therefore disbanded the army which he had assembled, and ordered
          all his men to return to their own homes, from the place that is
          called Wilfaraesdun,<a href="#note_361" id="noteref_361" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">361</span></span></a> that
          is, Wilfar's Hill, which is about ten miles distant from the
          village called Cataract, towards the north-west. He himself, with
          only one trusty thegn, whose name was Tondhere, withdrew and lay
          concealed in the house of Hunwald, a noble,<a href="#note_362" id="noteref_362" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">362</span></span></a> whom
          he imagined to be his most assured friend. But, alas! it was far
          otherwise; for Hunwald betrayed him, and Oswy, by the hands of his
          reeve, Ethilwin, foully slew him and the thegn aforesaid. This
          happened on the 20th of August, in the ninth year of his reign, at
          a place called Ingetlingum, where afterwards, to atone for this
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page165">[pg 165]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg165"/> crime, a monastery
          was built,<a href="#note_363" id="noteref_363" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">363</span></span></a>
          wherein prayers should be daily offered up to God for the
          redemption of the souls of both kings, to wit, of him that was
          murdered, and of him that commanded the murder.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">King Oswin was
          of a goodly countenance, and tall of stature, pleasant in
          discourse, and courteous in behaviour; and bountiful to all, gentle
          and simple alike; so that he was beloved by all men for the royal
          dignity of his mind and appearance and actions, and men of the
          highest rank came from almost all provinces to serve him. Among all
          the graces of virtue and moderation by which he was distinguished
          and, if I may say so, blessed in a special manner, humility is said
          to have been the greatest, which it will suffice to prove by one
          instance.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He had given a
          beautiful horse to Bishop Aidan, to use either in crossing rivers,
          or in performing a journey upon any urgent necessity, though the
          Bishop was wont to travel ordinarily on foot. Some short time
          after, a poor man meeting the Bishop, and asking alms, he
          immediately dismounted, and ordered the horse, with all his royal
          trappings, to be given to the beggar; for he was very
          compassionate, a great friend to the poor, and, in a manner, the
          father of the wretched. This being told to the king, when they were
          going in to dinner, he said to the Bishop, <span class="tei tei-q">“What did you mean, my lord Bishop, by giving the poor
          man that royal horse, which it was fitting that you should have for
          your own use? Had not we many other horses of less value, or things
          of other sorts, which would have been good enough to give to the
          poor, instead of giving that horse, which I had chosen and set
          apart for your own use?”</span> Thereupon the Bishop answered,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“What do you say, O king? Is that son of a
          mare more dear to you than that son of God?”</span> Upon this they
          went in to dinner, and the Bishop sat in his place; but the king,
          who had come in from hunting, stood warming himself, with his
          attendants, at the fire. Then, on a sudden, whilst he was warming
          himself, calling <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page166">[pg
          166]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg166"/>
          to mind what the bishop had said to him, he ungirt his sword, and
          gave it to a servant, and hastened to the Bishop and fell down at
          his feet, beseeching him to forgive him; <span class="tei tei-q">“For from this time forward,”</span> said he,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“I will never speak any more of this, nor
          will I judge of what or how much of our money you shall give to the
          sons of God.”</span> The bishop was much moved at this sight, and
          starting up, raised him, saying that he was entirely reconciled to
          him, if he would but sit down to his meat, and lay aside all
          sorrow. The king, at the bishop's command and request, was
          comforted, but the bishop, on the other hand, grew sad and was
          moved even to tears. His priest then asking him, in the language of
          his country, which the king and his servants did not understand,
          why he wept, <span class="tei tei-q">“I know,”</span> said he,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“that the king will not live long; for I
          never before saw a humble king; whence I perceive that he will soon
          be snatched out of this life, because this nation is not worthy of
          such a ruler.”</span> Not long after, the bishop's gloomy
          foreboding was fulfilled by the king's sad death, as has been said
          above. But Bishop Aidan himself was also taken out of this world,
          not more than twelve days after the death of the king he loved, on
          the 31st of August,<a href="#note_364" id="noteref_364" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">364</span></span></a> to
          receive the eternal reward of his labours from the Lord.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc153"/> <a id="pdf154"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_III_Chap_XV"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XV. How Bishop Aidan foretold
          to certain seamen that a storm would arise, and gave them some holy
          oil to calm it. [Between 642 and 645</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">How great the
          merits of Aidan were, was made manifest by the Judge of the heart,
          with the testimony of miracles, whereof it will suffice to mention
          three, that they may not be forgotten. A certain priest, whose name
          was Utta,<a href="#note_365" id="noteref_365" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">365</span></span></a> a man
          of great weight and sincerity, and on that account honoured by all
          men, even the princes of the world, was sent to Kent, to bring
          thence, as wife for <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page167">[pg
          167]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg167"/>
          King Oswy, Eanfled,<a href="#note_366" id="noteref_366" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">366</span></span></a> the
          daughter of King Edwin, who had been carried thither when her
          father was killed. Intending to go thither by land, but to return
          with the maiden by sea, he went to Bishop Aidan, and entreated him
          to offer up his prayers to the Lord for him and his company, who
          were then to set out on so long a journey. He, blessing them, and
          commending them to the Lord, at the same time gave them some holy
          oil, saying, <span class="tei tei-q">“I know that when you go on
          board ship, you will meet with a storm and contrary wind; but be
          mindful to cast this oil I give you into the sea, and the wind will
          cease immediately; you will have pleasant calm weather to attend
          you and send you home by the way that you desire.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">All these things
          fell out in order, even as the bishop had foretold. For first, the
          waves of the sea raged, and the sailors endeavoured to ride it out
          at anchor, but all to no purpose; for the sea sweeping over the
          ship on all sides and beginning to fill it with water, they all
          perceived that death was at hand and about to overtake them. The
          priest at last, remembering the bishop's words, laid hold of the
          phial and cast some of the oil into the sea, which at once, as had
          been foretold, ceased from its uproar. Thus it came to pass that
          the man of God, by the spirit of prophecy, foretold the storm that
          was to come to pass, and by virtue of the same spirit, though
          absent in the body, calmed it when it had arisen. The story of this
          miracle was not told me by a person of little credit, but by
          Cynimund, a most faithful priest of our church,<a href="#note_367" id="noteref_367" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">367</span></span></a> who
          declared that it was related to him by Utta, the priest, in whose
          case and through whom the same was wrought.</p>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page168">[pg 168]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg168"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc155"/> <a id="pdf156"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_III_Chap_XVI"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XVI. How the same Aidan, by his
          prayers, saved the royal city when it was fired by the enemy
          [Before 651</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Another notable
          miracle of the same father is related by many such as were likely
          to have knowledge thereof; for during the time that he was bishop,
          the hostile army of the Mercians, under the command of Penda,
          cruelly ravaged the country of the Northumbrians far and near, even
          to the royal city,<a href="#note_368" id="noteref_368" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">368</span></span></a> which
          has its name from Bebba, formerly its queen. Not being able to take
          it by storm or by siege, he endeavoured to burn it down; and having
          pulled down all the villages in the neighbourhood of the city, he
          brought thither an immense quantity of beams, rafters, partitions,
          wattles and thatch, wherewith he encompassed the place to a great
          height on the land side, and when he found the wind favourable, he
          set fire to it and attempted to burn the town.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At that time,
          the most reverend Bishop Aidan was dwelling in the Isle of
          Farne,<a href="#note_369" id="noteref_369" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">369</span></span></a> which
          is about two miles from the city; for thither he was wont often to
          retire to pray in solitude and silence; and, indeed, this lonely
          dwelling of his is to this day shown in that island. When he saw
          the flames of fire and the smoke carried by the wind rising above
          the city walls, he is said to have lifted up his eyes and hands to
          heaven, and cried with tears, <span class="tei tei-q">“Behold,
          Lord, how great evil is wrought by Penda!”</span> These words were
          hardly uttered, when the wind immediately veering from the city,
          drove back the flames upon those who had kindled them, so that some
          being hurt, and all afraid, they forebore any further attempts
          against the city, which they perceived to be protected by the hand
          of God.</p>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page169">[pg 169]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg169"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc157"/> <a id="pdf158"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XVII. How a prop of the church
          on which Bishop Aidan was leaning when he died, could not be
          consumed when the rest of the Church was on fire; and concerning
          his inward life. [651</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Aidan was in the
          king's township, not far from the city of which we have spoken
          above, at the time when death caused him to quit the body, after he
          had been bishop sixteen<a href="#note_370" id="noteref_370" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">370</span></span></a>
          years; for having a church and a chamber in that place, he was wont
          often to go and stay there, and to make excursions from it to
          preach in the country round about, which he likewise did at other
          of the king's townships, having nothing of his own besides his
          church and a few fields about it. When he was sick they set up a
          tent for him against the wall at the west end of the church, and so
          it happened that he breathed his last, leaning against a buttress
          that was on the outside of the church to strengthen the wall. He
          died in the seventeenth year of his episcopate, on the 31st of
          August.<a href="#note_371" id="noteref_371" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">371</span></span></a> His
          body was thence presently translated to the isle of Lindisfarne,
          and buried in the cemetery of the brethren. Some time after, when a
          larger church was built there and dedicated in honour of the
          blessed prince of the Apostles, his bones were translated thither,
          and laid on the right side of the altar, with the respect due to so
          great a prelate.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Finan,<a href="#note_372" id="noteref_372" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">372</span></span></a> who
          had likewise been sent thither from Hii, the island monastery of
          the Scots, succeeded him, and continued no small time in the
          bishopric. It happened some years after, that Penda, king of the
          Mercians, coming into these parts with a hostile army, destroyed
          all he could with fire and sword, and the village where the bishop
          died, along with the church above <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page170">[pg 170]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg170"/> mentioned, was burnt down; but it fell out in
          a wonderful manner that the buttress against which he had been
          leaning when he died, could not be consumed by the fire which
          devoured all about it. This miracle being noised abroad, the church
          was soon rebuilt in the same place, and that same buttress was set
          up on the outside, as it had been before, to strengthen the wall.
          It happened again, some time after, that the village and likewise
          the church were carelessly burned down the second time. Then again,
          the fire could not touch the buttress; and, miraculously, though
          the fire broke through the very holes of the nails wherewith it was
          fixed to the building, yet it could do no hurt to the buttress
          itself. When therefore the church was built there the third time,
          they did not, as before, place that buttress on the outside as a
          support of the building, but within the church, as a memorial of
          the miracle; where the people coming in might kneel, and implore
          the Divine mercy. And it is well known that since then many have
          found grace and been healed in that same place, as also that by
          means of splinters cut off from the buttress, and put into water,
          many more have obtained a remedy for their own infirmities and
          those of their friends.<a href="#note_373" id="noteref_373" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">373</span></span></a></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">I have written
          thus much concerning the character and works of the aforesaid
          Aidan, in no way commending or approving his lack of wisdom with
          regard to the observance of Easter; nay, heartily detesting it, as
          I have most manifestly proved in the book I have written,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“De Temporibus”</span>;<a href="#note_374" id="noteref_374" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">374</span></span></a> but,
          like an impartial historian, unreservedly relating what was done by
          or through him, and commending such things as are praiseworthy in
          his actions, and preserving the memory thereof for the benefit of
          the readers; to wit, his love of peace and charity; of continence
          and humility; his mind superior to anger and avarice, and despising
          pride and <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page171">[pg
          171]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg171"/>
          vainglory; his industry in keeping and teaching the Divine
          commandments, his power of study and keeping vigil; his priestly
          authority in reproving the haughty and powerful, and at the same
          time his tenderness in comforting the afflicted, and relieving or
          defending the poor. To be brief, so far as I have learnt from those
          that knew him, he took care to neglect none of those things which
          he found in the Gospels and the writings of Apostles and prophets,
          but to the utmost of his power endeavoured to fulfil them all in
          his deeds.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">These things I
          greatly admire and love in the aforesaid bishop, because I do not
          doubt that they were pleasing to God; but I do not approve or
          praise his observance of Easter at the wrong time, either through
          ignorance of the canonical time appointed, or, if he knew it, being
          prevailed on by the authority of his nation not to adopt it.<a href="#note_375" id="noteref_375" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">375</span></span></a> Yet
          this I approve in him, that in the celebration of his Easter, the
          object which he had at heart and reverenced and preached was the
          same as ours, to wit, the redemption of mankind, through the
          Passion, Resurrection and Ascension into Heaven of the Man Christ
          Jesus, who is the mediator between God and man. And therefore he
          always celebrated Easter, not as some falsely imagine, on the
          fourteenth of the moon, like the Jews, on any day of the week, but
          on the Lord's day, from the fourteenth to the twentieth of the
          moon; and this he did from his belief that the Resurrection of our
          Lord happened on the first day of the week, and for the hope of our
          resurrection, which also he, with the holy Church, believed would
          truly happen on that same first day of the week, now called the
          Lord's day.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc159"/> <a id="pdf160"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_III_Chap_XVIII"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XVIII. Of the life and death of
          the religious King Sigbert. [</span><span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-style: italic">Circ.</span></span>
<span style="font-size: 144%">631</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At this time,
          the kingdom of the East Angles, after the death of Earpwald, the
          successor of Redwald, was <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page172">[pg
          172]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg172"/>
          governed by his brother Sigbert,<a href="#note_376" id="noteref_376" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">376</span></span></a> a
          good and religious man, who some time before had been baptized in
          Gaul, whilst he lived in banishment, a fugitive from the enmity of
          Redwald. When he returned home, as soon as he ascended the throne,
          being desirous to imitate the good institutions which he had seen
          in Gaul, he founded a school wherein boys should be taught letters,
          and was assisted therein by Bishop Felix, who came to him from
          Kent, and who furnished them with masters and teachers after the
          manner of the people of Kent.<a href="#note_377" id="noteref_377" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">377</span></span></a></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">This king became
          so great a lover of the heavenly kingdom, that at last, quitting
          the affairs of his kingdom, and committing them to his kinsman
          Ecgric, who before had a share in that kingdom, he entered a
          monastery, which he had built for himself, and having received the
          tonsure, applied himself rather to do battle for a heavenly throne.
          A long time after this, it happened that the nation of the
          Mercians, under King Penda, made war on the East Angles; who
          finding themselves no match for their enemy, entreated Sigbert to
          go with them to battle, to encourage the soldiers. He was unwilling
          and refused, upon which they drew him against his will out of the
          monastery, and carried him to the army, hoping that the soldiers
          would be less afraid and less disposed to flee in the presence of
          one who had formerly been an active and distinguished commander.
          But he, still mindful of his profession, surrounded, as he was, by
          a royal army, would carry nothing in his hand but a wand, and was
          killed with King Ecgric; and the pagans pressing on, all their army
          was either slaughtered or dispersed.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">They were
          succeeded in the kingdom by Anna,<a href="#note_378" id="noteref_378" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">378</span></span></a> the
          son of Eni, of the blood royal, a good man, and the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page173">[pg 173]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg173"/> father of good children, of whom, in
          the proper place, we shall speak hereafter. He also was afterwards
          slain like his predecessors by the same pagan chief of the
          Mercians.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc161"/> <a id="pdf162"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_III_Chap_XIX"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XIX. How Fursa built a
          monastery among the East Angles, and of his visions and sanctity,
          to which, his flesh remaining uncorrupted after death bore
          testimony. [</span><span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-style: italic">Circ.</span></span>
<span style="font-size: 144%">633</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Whilst Sigbert
          still governed the kingdom, there came out of Ireland a holy man
          called Fursa,<a href="#note_379" id="noteref_379" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">379</span></span></a>
          renowned both for his words and actions, and remarkable for
          singular virtues, being desirous to live as a stranger and pilgrim
          for the Lord's sake, wherever an opportunity should offer. On
          coming into the province of the East Angles, he was honourably
          received by the aforesaid king, and performing his wonted task of
          preaching the Gospel, by the example of his virtue and the
          influence of his words, converted many unbelievers to Christ, and
          confirmed in the faith and love of Christ those that already
          believed.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Here he fell
          into some infirmity of body, and was thought worthy to see a vision
          of angels; in which he was admonished diligently to persevere in
          the ministry of the Word which he had undertaken, and indefatigably
          to apply himself to his usual watching and prayers; inasmuch as his
          end was certain, but the hour thereof uncertain, according to the
          saying of our Lord, <span class="tei tei-q">“Watch therefore, for
          ye know neither the day nor the hour.”</span><a href="#note_380" id="noteref_380" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">380</span></span></a> Being
          confirmed by this vision, he set himself with all speed to build a
          monastery on the ground which had been given him by King Sigbert,
          and to establish a rule <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page174">[pg
          174]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg174"/>
          of life therein. This monastery was pleasantly situated in the
          woods, near the sea; it was built within the area of a fort, which
          in the English language is called Cnobheresburg, that is,
          Cnobhere's Town;<a href="#note_381" id="noteref_381" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">381</span></span></a>
          afterwards, Anna, king of that province, and certain of the nobles,
          embellished it with more stately buildings and with gifts.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">This man was of
          noble Scottish<a href="#note_382" id="noteref_382" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">382</span></span></a>
          blood, but much more noble in mind than in birth. From his boyish
          years, he had earnestly applied himself to reading sacred books and
          observing monastic discipline, and, as is most fitting for holy
          men, he carefully practised all that he learned to be right.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Now, in course
          of time he himself built a monastery,<a href="#note_383" id="noteref_383" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">383</span></span></a>
          wherein he might with more freedom devote himself to his heavenly
          studies. There, falling sick, as the book concerning his life
          clearly informs us, he fell into a trance, and quitting his body
          from the evening till cockcrow, he was accounted worthy to behold
          the sight of the choirs of angels, and to hear their glad songs of
          praise. He was wont to declare, that among other things he
          distinctly heard this refrain: <span class="tei tei-q">“The saints
          shall go from strength to strength.”</span><a href="#note_384" id="noteref_384" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">384</span></span></a> And
          again, <span class="tei tei-q">“The God of gods shall be seen in
          Sion.”</span><a href="#note_385" id="noteref_385" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">385</span></span></a> Being
          restored to his body, and again taken from it three days after, he
          not only saw the greater joys of the blessed, but also fierce
          conflicts of evil spirits, who by frequent accusations wickedly
          endeavoured to obstruct his journey to heaven; but the angels
          protected him, and all their endeavours were in vain. Concerning
          all these matters, if any one desires to be more fully informed, to
          wit, with what subtlety of deceit the devils recounted both his
          actions and idle words, and even his thoughts, as if they had been
          written down in a book; <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page175">[pg
          175]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg175"/>
          and what joyous or grievous tidings he learned from the holy angels
          and just men who appeared to him among the angels; let him read the
          little book of his life which I have mentioned, and I doubt not
          that he will thereby reap much spiritual profit.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But there is one
          thing among the rest, which we have thought it may be beneficial to
          many to insert in this history. When he had been taken up on high,
          he was bidden by the angels that conducted him to look back upon
          the world. Upon which, casting his eyes downward, he saw, as it
          were, a dark valley in the depths underneath him. He also saw four
          fires in the air, not far distant from each other. Then asking the
          angels, what fires those were, he was told, they were the fires
          which would kindle and consume the world. One of them was of
          falsehood, when we do not fulfil that which we promised in Baptism,
          to renounce the Devil and all his works. The next was of
          covetousness, when we prefer the riches of the world to the love of
          heavenly things. The third was of discord, when we do not fear to
          offend our neighbour even in needless things. The fourth was of
          ruthlessness when we think it a light thing to rob and to defraud
          the weak. These fires, increasing by degrees, extended so as to
          meet one another, and united in one immense flame. When it drew
          near, fearing for himself, he said to the angel, <span class="tei tei-q">“Lord, behold the fire draws near to me.”</span> The
          angel answered, <span class="tei tei-q">“That which you did not
          kindle will not burn you; for though this appears to be a terrible
          and great pyre, yet it tries every man according to the merits of
          his works; for every man's concupiscence shall burn in this fire;
          for as a man burns in the body through unlawful pleasure, so, when
          set free from the body, he shall burn by the punishment which he
          has deserved.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Then he saw one
          of the three angels, who had been his guides throughout both
          visions, go before and divide the flaming fires, whilst the other
          two, flying about on both sides, defended him from the danger of
          the fire. He also saw devils flying through the fire, raising the
          flames of war against the just. Then followed <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page176">[pg 176]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg176"/> accusations of the envious spirits
          against himself, the defence of the good spirits, and a fuller
          vision of the heavenly hosts; as also of holy men of his own
          nation, who, as he had learnt, had worthily held the office of
          priesthood in old times, and who were known to fame; from whom he
          heard many things very salutary to himself, and to all others that
          would listen to them. When they had ended their discourse, and
          returned to Heaven with the angelic spirits, there remained with
          the blessed Fursa, the three angels of whom we have spoken before,
          and who were to bring him back to the body. And when they
          approached the aforesaid great fire, the angel divided the flame,
          as he had done before; but when the man of God came to the passage
          so opened amidst the flames, the unclean spirits, laying hold of
          one of those whom they were burning in the fire, cast him against
          him, and, touching his shoulder and jaw, scorched them. He knew the
          man, and called to mind that he had received his garment when he
          died. The holy angel, immediately laying hold of the man, threw him
          back into the fire, and the malignant enemy said, <span class="tei tei-q">“Do not reject him whom you before received; for as you
          received the goods of the sinner, so you ought to share in his
          punishment.”</span> But the angel withstood him, saying,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“He did not receive them through avarice,
          but in order to save his soul.”</span> The fire ceased, and the
          angel, turning to him, said, <span class="tei tei-q">“That which
          you kindled burned you; for if you had not received the money of
          this man that died in his sins, his punishment would not burn
          you.”</span> And he went on to speak with wholesome counsel of what
          ought to be done for the salvation of such as repented in the hour
          of death.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Being afterwards
          restored to the body, throughout the whole course of his life he
          bore the mark of the fire which he had felt in the spirit, visible
          to all men on his shoulder and jaw; and the flesh openly showed, in
          a wonderful manner, what the spirit had suffered in secret. He
          always took care, as he had done before, to teach all men the
          practice of virtue, as well by his example, as by preaching. But as
          for the story of his visions, he <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page177">[pg 177]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg177"/> would only relate them to those who, from
          desire of repentance, questioned him about them. An aged brother of
          our monastery is still living, who is wont to relate that a very
          truthful and religious man told him, that he had seen Fursa himself
          in the province of the East Angles, and heard those visions from
          his lips; adding, that though it was in severe winter weather and a
          hard frost, and the man was sitting in a thin garment when he told
          the story, yet he sweated as if it had been in the heat of
          mid-summer, by reason of the great terror or joy of which he
          spoke.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">To return to
          what we were saying before, when, after preaching the Word of God
          many years in Scotland,<a href="#note_386" id="noteref_386" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">386</span></span></a> he
          could not well endure the disturbance of the crowds that resorted
          to him, leaving all that he looked upon as his own, he departed
          from his native island, and came with a few brothers through the
          Britons into the province of the English, and preaching the Word
          there, as has been said, built a famous monastery.<a href="#note_387" id="noteref_387" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">387</span></span></a> When
          this was duly carried out, he became desirous to rid himself of all
          business of this world, and even of the monastery itself, and
          forthwith left the care of it and of its souls, to his brother
          Fullan, and the priests Gobban and Dicull,<a href="#note_388" id="noteref_388" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">388</span></span></a> and
          being himself free from all worldly affairs, resolved to end his
          life as a hermit. He had another brother called Ultan, who, after a
          long monastic probation, had also adopted the life of an anchorite.
          So, seeking him out alone, he lived a whole year with him in
          self-denial and prayer, and laboured daily with his hands.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Afterwards
          seeing the province thrown into confusion by the irruptions of the
          pagans,<a href="#note_389" id="noteref_389" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">389</span></span></a> and
          foreseeing that the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page178">[pg
          178]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg178"/>
          monasteries would also be in danger, he left all things in order,
          and sailed over into Gaul, and being there honourably entertained
          by Clovis, king of the Franks,<a href="#note_390" id="noteref_390" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">390</span></span></a> or by
          the patrician Ercinwald, he built a monastery in the place called
          Latineacum,<a href="#note_391" id="noteref_391" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">391</span></span></a> and
          falling sick not long after, departed this life. The same
          Ercinwald, the patrician, took his body, and kept it in the porch
          of a church he was building in his town of Perrona,<a href="#note_392" id="noteref_392" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">392</span></span></a> till
          the church itself should be dedicated. This happened twenty-seven
          days after, and the body being taken from the porch, to be
          re-buried near the altar, was found as whole as if he had died that
          very hour. And again, four years after, when a more beautiful
          shrine had been built to receive his body to the east of the altar,
          it was still found without taint of corruption, and was translated
          thither with due honour; where it is well known that his merits,
          through the divine operation, have been declared by many miracles.
          We have briefly touched upon these matters as well as the
          incorruption of his body, that the lofty nature of the man may be
          better known to our readers. All which, as also concerning the
          comrades of his warfare, whosoever will read it, will find more
          fully described in the book of his life.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc163"/> <a id="pdf164"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_III_Chap_XX"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XX. How, when Honorius died,
          Deusdedit became Archbishop of Canterbury; and of those who were at
          that time bishops of the East Angles, and of the church of
          Rochester. [653</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the meantime,
          Felix, bishop of the East Angles, dying, when he had held that see
          seventeen years,<a href="#note_393" id="noteref_393" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">393</span></span></a>
<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page179">[pg 179]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg179"/> Honorius ordained
          Thomas his deacon, of the province of the Gyrwas,<a href="#note_394" id="noteref_394" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">394</span></span></a> in
          his place; and he being taken from this life when he had been
          bishop five years, Bertgils, surnamed Boniface,<a href="#note_395" id="noteref_395" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">395</span></span></a> of
          the province of Kent, was appointed in his stead. Honorius<a href="#note_396" id="noteref_396" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">396</span></span></a>
          himself also, having run his course, departed this life in the year
          of our Lord 653, on the 30th of September; and when the see had
          been vacant a year and six months, Deusdedit<a href="#note_397" id="noteref_397" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">397</span></span></a> of
          the nation of the West Saxons, was chosen the sixth Archbishop of
          Canterbury. To ordain him, Ithamar,<a href="#note_398" id="noteref_398" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">398</span></span></a>
          bishop of Rochester, came thither. His ordination was on the 26th
          of March, and he ruled the church nine years, four months, and two
          days; and when Ithamar died, he consecrated in his place
          Damian,<a href="#note_399" id="noteref_399" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">399</span></span></a> who
          was of the race of the South Saxons.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc165"/> <a id="pdf166"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_III_Chap_XXI"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XXI. How the province of the
          Midland Angles became Christian under King Peada. [653</span>
<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At this time,
          the Middle Angles, that is, the Angles of the Midland
          country,<a href="#note_400" id="noteref_400" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">400</span></span></a> under
          their Prince Peada, the son of King Penda, received the faith and
          mysteries of the truth. <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page180">[pg
          180]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg180"/>
          Being an excellent youth, and most worthy of the name and office of
          a king, he was by his father elevated to the throne of that nation,
          and came to Oswy, king of the Northumbrians, requesting to have his
          daughter Alchfled<a href="#note_401" id="noteref_401" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">401</span></span></a> given
          him to wife; but he could not obtain his desire unless he would
          receive the faith of Christ, and be baptized, with the nation which
          he governed. When he heard the preaching of the truth, the promise
          of the heavenly kingdom, and the hope of resurrection and future
          immortality, he declared that he would willingly become a
          Christian, even though he should not obtain the maiden; being
          chiefly prevailed on to receive the faith by King Oswy's son
          Alchfrid,<a href="#note_402" id="noteref_402" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">402</span></span></a> who
          was his brother-in-law and friend, for he had married his sister
          Cyneburg,<a href="#note_403" id="noteref_403" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">403</span></span></a> the
          daughter of King Penda.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Accordingly he
          was baptized by Bishop Finan, with all his nobles and thegns,<a href="#note_404" id="noteref_404" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">404</span></span></a> and
          their servants, that came along with him, at a noted township,
          belonging to the king, called At the Wall.<a href="#note_405" id="noteref_405" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">405</span></span></a> And
          having received four priests, who by reason of their learning and
          good life were deemed proper to instruct and baptize his nation, he
          returned home with much joy. These priests were Cedd and Adda, and
          Betti and Diuma;<a href="#note_406" id="noteref_406" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">406</span></span></a> the
          last of whom was by nation a Scot, the others English. Adda was
          brother to Utta, whom we have mentioned before,<a href="#note_407" id="noteref_407" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">407</span></span></a> a
          renowned priest, and abbot of the monastery which is called At the
          Goat's Head.<a href="#note_408" id="noteref_408" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">408</span></span></a> The
          aforesaid priests, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page181">[pg
          181]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg181"/>
          arriving in the province with the prince, preached the Word, and
          were heard willingly; and many, as well of the nobility as the
          common sort, renouncing the abominations of idolatry, were daily
          washed in the fountain of the faith.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Nor did King
          Penda forbid the preaching of the Word even among his people, the
          Mercians, if any were willing to hear it; but, on the contrary, he
          hated and despised those whom he perceived to be without the works
          of faith, when they had once received the faith of Christ, saying,
          that they were contemptible and wretched who scorned to obey their
          God, in whom they believed. These things were set on foot two years
          before the death of King Penda.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But when he was
          slain, and the most Christian king, Oswy, succeeded him in the
          throne, as we shall hereafter relate, Diuma,<a href="#note_409" id="noteref_409" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">409</span></span></a> one
          of the aforesaid four priests, was made bishop of the Midland
          Angles, as also of the Mercians, being ordained by Bishop Finan;
          for the scarcity of priests made it necessary that one prelate
          should be set over two nations. Having in a short time gained many
          people to the Lord, he died among the Midland Angles, in the
          country called Infeppingum;<a href="#note_410" id="noteref_410" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">410</span></span></a> and
          Ceollach, also of the Scottish nation, succeeded him in the
          bishopric. But he, not long after, left his bishopric, and returned
          to the island of Hii,<a href="#note_411" id="noteref_411" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">411</span></span></a>
          which, among the Scots, was the chief and head of many monasteries.
          His successor in the bishopric was Trumhere,<a href="#note_412" id="noteref_412" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">412</span></span></a> a
          godly man, and trained in the monastic life, an Englishman, but
          ordained bishop by the Scots. This happened in the days of King
          Wulfhere, of whom we shall speak hereafter.</p>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page182">[pg 182]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg182"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc167"/> <a id="pdf168"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_III_Chap_XXII"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XXII. How under King Sigbert,
          through the preaching of Cedd, the East Saxons again received the
          faith, which they had before cast off. [653</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At that time,
          also, the East Saxons, at the instance of King Oswy, again received
          the faith, which they had formerly cast off when they expelled
          Mellitus, their bishop.<a href="#note_413" id="noteref_413" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">413</span></span></a> For
          Sigbert,<a href="#note_414" id="noteref_414" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">414</span></span></a> who
          reigned next to Sigbert surnamed The Little, was then king of that
          nation, and a friend to King Oswy, who, when Sigbert came to the
          province of the Northumbrians to visit him, as he often did, used
          to endeavour to convince him that those could not be gods that had
          been made by the hands of men; that a stock or a stone could not be
          proper matter to form a god, the residue whereof was either burned
          in the fire, or framed into any vessels for the use of men, or else
          was cast out as refuse, trampled on and turned into dust. That God
          is rather to be understood as incomprehensible in majesty and
          invisible to human eyes, almighty, eternal, the Creator of heaven
          and earth and of mankind; Who governs and will judge the world in
          righteousness, Whose eternal abode must be believed to be in
          Heaven, and not in base and perishable metal; and that it ought in
          reason to be concluded, that all those who learn and do the will of
          Him by Whom they were created, will receive from Him eternal
          rewards. King Oswy having often, with friendly counsel, like a
          brother, said this and much more to the like effect to King
          Sigbert, at length, aided by the consent of his friends, he
          believed, and after he had consulted with those about him, and
          exhorted them, when they all agreed and assented to the faith, he
          was baptized with them by Bishop Finan, in the king's township
          above spoken of, which is called At the Wall,<a href="#note_415" id="noteref_415" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">415</span></span></a>
          because it is close by the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page183">[pg 183]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg183"/> wall which the Romans formerly drew across
          the island of Britain, at the distance of twelve miles from the
          eastern sea.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">King Sigbert,
          having now become a citizen of the eternal kingdom, returned to the
          seat of his temporal kingdom, requesting of King Oswy that he would
          give him some teachers, to convert his nation to the faith of
          Christ, and cleanse them in the fountain of salvation. Wherefore
          Oswy, sending into the province of the Midland Angles, summoned the
          man of God, Cedd,<a href="#note_416" id="noteref_416" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">416</span></span></a> and,
          giving him another priest for his companion, sent them to preach
          the Word to the East Saxons. When these two, travelling to all
          parts of that country, had gathered a numerous Church to the Lord,
          it happened once that Cedd returned home, and came to the church of
          Lindisfarne to confer with Bishop Finan; who, finding that the work
          of the Gospel had prospered in his hands, made him bishop of the
          nation of the East Saxons, calling to him two other bishops<a href="#note_417" id="noteref_417" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">417</span></span></a> to
          assist at the ordination. Cedd, having received the episcopal
          dignity, returned to his province, and pursuing the work he had
          begun with more ample authority, built churches in divers places,
          and ordained priests and deacons to assist him in the Word of
          faith, and the ministry of Baptism,<a href="#note_418" id="noteref_418" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">418</span></span></a>
          especially in the city which, in the language of the Saxons, is
          called Ythancaestir,<a href="#note_419" id="noteref_419" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">419</span></span></a> as
          also in that which is named Tilaburg.<a href="#note_420" id="noteref_420" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">420</span></span></a> The
          first of these places is on the bank of the Pant, the other on the
          bank of the Thames. In these, gathering a flock of Christ's
          servants, he taught them to observe the discipline of a rule of
          life, as far as those rude people were then capable of receiving
          it.</p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page184">[pg
          184]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg184"/>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Whilst the
          teaching of the everlasting life was thus, for no small time,
          making daily increase in that province to the joy of the king and
          of all the people, it happened that the king, at the instigation of
          the enemy of all good men, was murdered by his own kindred. They
          were two brothers who did this wicked deed; and being asked what
          had moved them to it, they had nothing else to answer, but that
          they had been incensed against the king, and hated him, because he
          was too apt to spare his enemies, and calmly forgave the wrongs
          they had done him, upon their entreaty. Such was the crime for
          which the king was killed, because he observed the precepts of the
          Gospel with a devout heart; but in this innocent death his real
          offence was also punished, according to the prediction of the man
          of God. For one of those nobles<a href="#note_421" id="noteref_421" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">421</span></span></a> that
          murdered him was unlawfully married, and when the bishop was not
          able to prevent or correct the sin, he excommunicated him, and
          commanded all that would give ear to him not to enter this man's
          house, nor to eat of his meat. But the king made light of this
          command, and being invited by the noble, went to a banquet at his
          house. As he was going thence, the bishop met him. The king,
          beholding him, immediately dismounted from his horse, trembling,
          and fell down at his feet, begging pardon for his offence; for the
          bishop, who was likewise on horseback, had also alighted. Being
          much incensed, he touched the prostrate king with the rod he held
          in his hand, and spoke thus with the authority of his office:
          <span class="tei tei-q">“I tell thee, forasmuch as thou wouldest
          not refrain from the house of that sinful and condemned man, thou
          shalt die in that very house.”</span> Yet it is to be believed,
          that such a death of a religious man not only blotted out his
          offence, but even added to his merit; because it happened on
          account of his piety and his observance of the commands of
          Christ.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Sigbert was
          succeeded in the kingdom by Suidhelm,<a href="#note_422" id="noteref_422" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">422</span></span></a> the
          son of Sexbald, who was baptized by the same <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page185">[pg 185]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg185"/> Cedd, in the province of the East
          Angles, in the royal township, called Rendlaesham,<a href="#note_423" id="noteref_423" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">423</span></span></a> that
          is, Rendil's Dwelling; and Ethelwald,<a href="#note_424" id="noteref_424" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">424</span></span></a> king
          of the East Angles, brother to Anna, king of the same people,
          received him as he came forth from the holy font.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc169"/> <a id="pdf170"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_III_Chap_XXIII"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XXIII. How Bishop Cedd, having
          a place for building a monastery given him by King Ethelwald,
          consecrated it to the Lord with prayer and fasting; and concerning
          his death. [659-664</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The same man of
          God, whilst he was bishop among the East Saxons, was also wont
          oftentimes to visit his own province, Northumbria, for the purpose
          of exhortation. Oidilwald,<a href="#note_425" id="noteref_425" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">425</span></span></a> the
          son of King Oswald, who reigned among the Deiri, finding him a
          holy, wise, and good man, desired him to accept some land whereon
          to build a monastery, to which the king himself might frequently
          resort, to pray to the Lord and hear the Word, and where he might
          be buried when he died; for he believed faithfully that he should
          receive much benefit from the daily prayers of those who were to
          serve the Lord in that place. The king had before with him a
          brother of the same bishop, called Caelin, a man no less devoted to
          God, who, being a priest, was wont to administer to him and his
          house the Word and the Sacraments of the faith; by whose means he
          chiefly came to know and love the bishop. So then, complying with
          the king's desires, the Bishop chose himself a place whereon to
          build a monastery among steep and distant mountains, which looked
          more like lurking-places for robbers and dens of wild beasts, than
          dwellings of men; to the end that, according <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page186">[pg 186]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg186"/> to the prophecy of Isaiah, <span class="tei tei-q">“In the habitation of dragons, where each lay, might be
          grass with reeds and rushes;”</span><a href="#note_426" id="noteref_426" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">426</span></span></a> that
          is, that the fruits of good works should spring up, where before
          beasts were wont to dwell, or men to live after the manner of
          beasts.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But the man of
          God, desiring first to cleanse the place which he had received for
          the monastery from stain of former crimes, by prayer and fasting,
          and so to lay the foundations there, requested of the king that he
          would give him opportunity and leave to abide there for prayer all
          the time of Lent, which was at hand. All which days, except
          Sundays, he prolonged his fast till the evening, according to
          custom, and then took no other sustenance than a small piece of
          bread, one hen's egg, and a little milk and water. This, he said,
          was the custom of those of whom he had learned the rule of regular
          discipline, first to consecrate to the Lord, by prayer and fasting,
          the places which they had newly received for building a monastery
          or a church. When there were ten days of Lent still remaining,
          there came a messenger to call him to the king; and he, that the
          holy work might not be intermitted, on account of the king's
          affairs, entreated his priest, Cynibill, who was also his own
          brother, to complete his pious undertaking. Cynibill readily
          consented, and when the duty of fasting and prayer was over, he
          there built the monastery, which is now called Laestingaeu,<a href="#note_427" id="noteref_427" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">427</span></span></a> and
          established therein religious customs according to the use of
          Lindisfarne, where he had been trained.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">When Cedd had
          for many years held the office of bishop in the aforesaid province,
          and also taken charge of this monastery, over which he placed
          provosts,<a href="#note_428" id="noteref_428" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">428</span></span></a> it
          happened that he came thither at a time when there was plague, and
          fell sick and died. He was first buried <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page187">[pg 187]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg187"/> without the walls; but in the process of time
          a church was built of stone in the monastery, in honour of the
          Blessed Mother of God, and his body was laid in it, on the right
          side of the altar.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The bishop left
          the monastery to be governed after him by his brother Ceadda,<a href="#note_429" id="noteref_429" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">429</span></span></a> who
          was afterwards made bishop, as shall be told hereafter. For, as it
          rarely happens, the four brothers we have mentioned, Cedd and
          Cynibill, and Caelin and Ceadda, were all celebrated priests of the
          Lord, and two of them also came to be bishops. When the brethren
          who were in his monastery, in the province of the East
          Saxons,<a href="#note_430" id="noteref_430" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">430</span></span></a> heard
          that the bishop was dead and buried in the province of the
          Northumbrians, about thirty men of that monastery came thither,
          being desirous either to live near the body of their father, if it
          should please God, or to die and be buried there. Being gladly
          received by their brethren and fellow soldiers in Christ, all of
          them died there struck down by the aforesaid pestilence, except one
          little boy, who is known to have been saved from death by the
          prayers of his spiritual father. For being alive long after, and
          giving himself to the reading of Scripture, he was told that he had
          not been regenerated by the water of Baptism, and being then
          cleansed in the laver of salvation, he was afterwards promoted to
          the order of priesthood, and was of service to many in the church.
          I do not doubt that he was delivered at the point of death, as I
          have said, by the intercession of his father, to whose body he had
          come for love of him, that so he might himself avoid eternal death,
          and by teaching, offer the ministry of life and salvation to others
          of the brethren.</p>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page188">[pg 188]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg188"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc171"/> <a id="pdf172"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_III_Chap_XXIV"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XXIV. How when King Penda was
          slain, the province of the Mercians received the faith of Christ,
          and Oswy gave possessions and territories to God, for building
          monasteries, as a thank offering for the victory obtained.
          [655</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At this time,
          King Oswy was exposed to the cruel and intolerable invasions of
          Penda, king of the Mercians, whom we have so often mentioned, and
          who had slain his brother;<a href="#note_431" id="noteref_431" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">431</span></span></a> at
          length, compelled by his necessity, he promised to give him
          countless gifts and royal marks of honour greater than can be
          believed, to purchase peace; provided that he would return home,
          and cease to waste and utterly destroy the provinces of his
          kingdom. The pagan king refused to grant his request, for he had
          resolved to blot out and extirpate all his nation, from the highest
          to the lowest; whereupon King Oswy had recourse to the protection
          of the Divine pity for deliverance from his barbarous and pitiless
          foe, and binding himself by a vow, said, <span class="tei tei-q">“If the pagan will not accept our gifts, let us offer
          them to Him that will, the Lord our God.”</span> He then vowed,
          that if he should win the victory, he would dedicate his daughter
          to the Lord in holy virginity, and give twelve pieces of land
          whereon to build monasteries. After this he gave battle with a very
          small army: indeed, it is reported that the pagans had thirty times
          the number of men; for they had thirty legions, drawn up under most
          noted commanders.<a href="#note_432" id="noteref_432" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">432</span></span></a> King
          Oswy and his son Alchfrid met them with a very small army, as has
          been said, but trusting in Christ as their Leader; his other son,
          Egfrid,<a href="#note_433" id="noteref_433" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">433</span></span></a> was
          then kept as a hostage at the court of Queen Cynwise,<a href="#note_434" id="noteref_434" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">434</span></span></a>
<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page189">[pg 189]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg189"/> in the province of
          the Mercians. King Oswald's son Oidilwald,<a href="#note_435" id="noteref_435" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">435</span></span></a> who
          ought to have supported them, was on the enemy's side, and led them
          on to fight against his country and his uncle; though, during the
          battle, he withdrew, and awaited the event in a place of safety.
          The engagement began, the pagans were put to flight or killed, the
          thirty royal commanders, who had come to Penda's assistance, were
          almost all of them slain; among whom was Ethelhere,<a href="#note_436" id="noteref_436" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">436</span></span></a>
          brother and successor to Anna, king of the East Angles. He had been
          the occasion of the war, and was now killed, having lost his army
          and auxiliaries. The battle was fought near the river
          Winwaed,<a href="#note_437" id="noteref_437" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">437</span></span></a> which
          then, owing to the great rains, was in flood, and had overflowed
          its banks, so that many more were drowned in the flight than
          destroyed in battle by the sword.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Then King Oswy,
          according to the vow he had made to the Lord, returned thanks to
          God for the victory granted him, and gave his daughter
          Elfled,<a href="#note_438" id="noteref_438" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">438</span></span></a> who
          was scarce a year old, to be consecrated to Him in perpetual
          virginity; bestowing also twelve small estates of land, wherein the
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page190">[pg 190]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg190"/> practice of earthly
          warfare should cease, and place and means should be afforded to
          devout and zealous monks to wage spiritual warfare, and pray for
          the eternal peace of his nation. Of these estates six were in the
          province of the Deiri, and the other six in that of the Bernicians.
          Each of the estates contained ten families, that is, a hundred and
          twenty in all. The aforesaid daughter of King Oswy, who was to be
          dedicated to God, entered the monastery called Heruteu,<a href="#note_439" id="noteref_439" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">439</span></span></a> or,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“The Island of the Hart,”</span> at that
          time ruled by the Abbess Hilda,<a href="#note_440" id="noteref_440" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">440</span></span></a> who,
          two years after, having acquired an estate of ten families, at the
          place called Streanaeshalch,<a href="#note_441" id="noteref_441" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">441</span></span></a> built
          a monastery there, in which the aforesaid king's daughter was first
          trained in the monastic life and afterwards became abbess; till, at
          the age of fifty-nine, the blessed virgin departed to be united to
          her Heavenly Bridegroom. In this monastery, she and her father,
          Oswy, her mother, Eanfled, her mother's father, Edwin,<a href="#note_442" id="noteref_442" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">442</span></span></a> and
          many other noble persons, are buried in the church of the holy
          Apostle Peter. King Oswy concluded this war in the district of
          Loidis, in the thirteenth year of his reign, on the 15th of
          November,<a href="#note_443" id="noteref_443" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">443</span></span></a> to
          the great benefit of both nations; for he delivered his own people
          from the hostile depredations of the pagans, and, having made an
          end of their heathen chief, converted the Mercians and the adjacent
          provinces to the grace of the Christian faith.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Diuma was made
          the first bishop of the Mercians, as also of Lindsey and the
          Midland Angles, as has been said above,<a href="#note_444" id="noteref_444" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">444</span></span></a> and
          he died and was buried among the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page191">[pg 191]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg191"/> Midland Angles. The second was
          Ceollach,<a href="#note_445" id="noteref_445" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">445</span></span></a> who,
          giving up his episcopal office before his death, returned into
          Scotland. Both these bishops belonged to the nation of the Scots.
          The third was Trumhere, an Englishman, but educated and ordained by
          the Scots. He was abbot of the monastery that is called
          Ingetlingum,<a href="#note_446" id="noteref_446" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">446</span></span></a> and
          is the place where King Oswin was killed, as has been said above;
          for Queen Eanfled, his kinswoman, in expiation of his unjust death,
          begged of King Oswy that he would give Trumhere, the aforesaid
          servant of God, a place there to build a monastery, because he also
          was kinsman to the slaughtered king; in which monastery continual
          prayers should be offered up for the eternal welfare of the kings,
          both of him that was murdered, and of him that commanded the
          murder. The same King Oswy governed the Mercians, as also the
          people of the other southern provinces, three years after he had
          slain King Penda; and he likewise subdued the greater part of the
          Picts to the dominion of the English.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At this time he
          gave to the above-mentioned Peada, son to King Penda, because he
          was his kinsman, the kingdom of the Southern Mercians,<a href="#note_447" id="noteref_447" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">447</span></span></a>
          consisting, as is said, of 5,000 families, divided by the river
          Trent from the Northern Mercians, whose land contains 7,000
          families; but Peada was foully slain in the following spring, by
          the treachery, as is said, of his wife,<a href="#note_448" id="noteref_448" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">448</span></span></a>
          during the very time of the Easter festival. Three years after the
          death of King Penda, the Mercian chiefs, Immin, and Eafa, and
          Eadbert, rebelled against King Oswy, setting up for their king,
          Wulfhere,<a href="#note_449" id="noteref_449" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">449</span></span></a> son
          to the said Penda, a youth whom they had kept concealed; and
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page192">[pg 192]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg192"/> expelling the
          ealdormen of the foreign king, they bravely recovered at once their
          liberty and their lands; and being thus free, together with their
          king, they rejoiced to serve Christ the true King, for the sake of
          an everlasting kingdom in heaven. This king governed the Mercians
          seventeen years, and had for his first bishop Trumhere,<a href="#note_450" id="noteref_450" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">450</span></span></a> above
          spoken of; the second was Jaruman;<a href="#note_451" id="noteref_451" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">451</span></span></a> the
          third Ceadda;<a href="#note_452" id="noteref_452" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">452</span></span></a> the
          fourth Wynfrid.<a href="#note_453" id="noteref_453" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">453</span></span></a> All
          these, succeeding each other in order under King Wulfhere,
          discharged episcopal duties to the Mercian nation.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc173"/> <a id="pdf174"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_III_Chap_XXV"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XXV. How the question arose
          about the due time of keeping Easter, with those that came out of
          Scotland.</span><a href="#note_454" id="noteref_454" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">454</span></span></a><span style="font-size: 144%">[664</span>
<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the meantime,
          Bishop Aidan being taken away from this life, Finan, who was
          ordained and sent by the Scots, succeeded him in the bishopric, and
          built a church in the Isle of Lindisfarne, fit for the episcopal
          see; nevertheless, after the manner of the Scots, he made it, not
          of stone, but entirely of hewn oak, and covered it with reeds; and
          it was afterwards dedicated in honour of the blessed Peter the
          Apostle, by the most reverend Archbishop Theodore. Eadbert,<a href="#note_455" id="noteref_455" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">455</span></span></a> also
          bishop of that place, took off the thatch, and caused it to be
          covered entirely, both roof and walls, with plates of
          lead.</p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page193">[pg
          193]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg193"/>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At this time, a
          great and frequently debated question arose about the observance of
          Easter;<a href="#note_456" id="noteref_456" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">456</span></span></a> those
          that came from Kent or Gaul affirming, that the Scots celebrated
          Easter Sunday contrary to the custom of the universal Church. Among
          them was a most zealous defender of the true Easter, whose name was
          Ronan,<a href="#note_457" id="noteref_457" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">457</span></span></a> a
          Scot by nation, but instructed in the rule of ecclesiastical truth
          in Gaul or Italy. Disputing with Finan, he convinced many, or at
          least induced them to make a more strict inquiry after the truth;
          yet he could not prevail upon Finan, but, on the contrary,
          embittered him the more by reproof, and made him a professed
          opponent of the truth, for he was of a violent temper. James,<a href="#note_458" id="noteref_458" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">458</span></span></a>
          formerly the deacon of the venerable Archbishop Paulinus, as has
          been said above, observed the true and Catholic Easter, with all
          those that he could instruct in the better way. Queen Eanfled and
          her followers also observed it as she had seen it practised in
          Kent, having with her a Kentish priest who followed the Catholic
          observance, whose name was Romanus. Thus it is said to have
          sometimes happened in those times that Easter was twice celebrated
          in one year; and that when the king, having ended his fast, was
          keeping Easter, the queen and her followers were still fasting, and
          celebrating Palm Sunday. Whilst Aidan lived, this difference about
          the observance of Easter was patiently tolerated by all men, for
          they well knew, that though he could not keep Easter contrary to
          the custom of those who had sent him, yet he industriously laboured
          to practise the works of faith, piety, and love, according to the
          custom of all holy men; for which reason he was deservedly beloved
          by all, even by those who differed in opinion concerning Easter,
          and was held in veneration, not only by less important persons, but
          even by the bishops, Honorius of Canterbury, and Felix of the East
          Angles.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But after the
          death of Finan, who succeeded him, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page194">[pg 194]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg194"/> when Colman, who was also sent from
          Scotland,<a href="#note_459" id="noteref_459" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">459</span></span></a> came
          to be bishop, a greater controversy arose about the observance of
          Easter, and other rules of ecclesiastical life. Whereupon this
          question began naturally to influence the thoughts and hearts of
          many who feared, lest haply, having received the name of
          Christians, they might run, or have run, in vain. This reached the
          ears of the rulers, King Oswy and his son Alchfrid. Now Oswy,
          having been instructed and baptized by the Scots, and being very
          perfectly skilled in their language, thought nothing better than
          what they taught; but Alchfrid, having for his teacher in
          Christianity the learned Wilfrid,<a href="#note_460" id="noteref_460" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">460</span></span></a> who
          had formerly gone to Rome to study ecclesiastical doctrine, and
          spent much time at Lyons with Dalfinus,<a href="#note_461" id="noteref_461" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">461</span></span></a>
          archbishop of Gaul, from whom also he had received the crown of
          ecclesiastical tonsure, rightly thought that this man's doctrine
          ought to be preferred before all the traditions of the Scots. For
          this reason he had also given him a monastery of forty families, at
          a place called Inhrypum;<a href="#note_462" id="noteref_462" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">462</span></span></a> which
          place, not long before, he had given for a monastery to those that
          were followers of the Scots; but forasmuch as they afterwards,
          being left to their choice, preferred to quit the place rather than
          alter their custom, he gave it to him, whose life and doctrine were
          worthy of it.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Agilbert, bishop
          of the West Saxons,<a href="#note_463" id="noteref_463" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">463</span></span></a>
          above-mentioned, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page195">[pg
          195]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg195"/> a
          friend of King Alchfrid and of Abbot Wilfrid, had at that time come
          into the province of the Northumbrians, and was staying some time
          among them; at the request of Alchfrid, he made Wilfrid a priest in
          his aforesaid monastery. He had in his company a priest, whose name
          was Agatho.<a href="#note_464" id="noteref_464" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">464</span></span></a> The
          question being raised there concerning Easter and the tonsure and
          other ecclesiastical matters, it was arranged, that a synod should
          be held in the monastery of Streanaeshalch,<a href="#note_465" id="noteref_465" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">465</span></span></a> which
          signifies the Bay of the Lighthouse, where the Abbess Hilda,<a href="#note_466" id="noteref_466" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">466</span></span></a> a
          woman devoted to the service of God, then ruled; and that there
          this question should be decided. The kings, both father and son,
          came thither, and the bishops, Colman with his Scottish clerks, and
          Agilbert with the priests Agatho and Wilfrid. James and Romanus
          were on their side; but the Abbess Hilda and her followers were for
          the Scots, as was also the venerable Bishop Cedd,<a href="#note_467" id="noteref_467" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">467</span></span></a> long
          before ordained by the Scots, as has been said above, and he acted
          in that council as a most careful interpreter for both parties.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">King Oswy first
          made an opening speech, in which he said that it behoved those who
          served one God to observe one rule of life; and as they all
          expected the same kingdom in heaven, so they ought not to differ in
          the celebration of the heavenly mysteries; but rather to inquire
          which was the truer tradition, that it might be followed by all in
          common; he then commanded his bishop, Colman, first to declare what
          the custom was which he observed, and whence it derived its origin.
          Then Colman said, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Easter which I keep,
          I received from my elders, who sent me hither as bishop; all our
          forefathers, men beloved of God, are known to have celebrated it
          after the same manner; and that it may not seem to any contemptible
          and worthy to be <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page196">[pg
          196]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg196"/>
          rejected, it is the same which the blessed John the Evangelist, the
          disciple specially beloved of our Lord, with all the churches over
          which he presided, is recorded to have celebrated.”</span><a href="#note_468" id="noteref_468" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">468</span></span></a> When
          he had said thus much, and more to the like effect, the king
          commanded Agilbert to make known the manner of his observance and
          to show whence it was derived, and on what authority he followed
          it. Agilbert answered, <span class="tei tei-q">“I beseech you, let
          my disciple, the priest Wilfrid, speak in my stead; because we both
          concur with the other followers of the ecclesiastical tradition
          that are here present, and he can better and more clearly explain
          our opinion in the English language, than I can by an
          interpreter.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Then Wilfrid,
          being ordered by the king to speak, began thus:—<span class="tei tei-q">“The Easter which we keep, we saw celebrated by all at
          Rome, where the blessed Apostles, Peter and Paul, lived, taught,
          suffered, and were buried; we saw the same done by all in Italy and
          in Gaul, when we travelled through those countries for the purpose
          of study and prayer. We found it observed in Africa, Asia, Egypt,
          Greece, and all the world, wherever the Church of Christ is spread
          abroad, among divers nations and tongues, at one and the same time;
          save only among these and their accomplices in obstinacy, I mean
          the Picts and the Britons, who foolishly, in these two remote
          islands of the ocean, and only in part even of them, strive to
          oppose all the rest of the world.”</span> When he had so said,
          Colman answered, <span class="tei tei-q">“It is strange that you
          choose to call our efforts foolish, wherein we follow the example
          of so great an Apostle, who was thought worthy to lean on our
          Lord's bosom, when all the world knows him to have lived most
          wisely.”</span> Wilfrid replied, <span class="tei tei-q">“Far be it
          from us to charge John with folly, for he literally observed the
          precepts of the Mosaic Law, whilst the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page197">[pg 197]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg197"/> Church was still Jewish in many points, and
          the Apostles, lest they should give cause of offence to the Jews
          who were among the Gentiles, were not able at once to cast off all
          the observances of the Law which had been instituted by God, in the
          same way as it is necessary that all who come to the faith should
          forsake the idols which were invented by devils. For this reason it
          was, that Paul circumcised Timothy,<a href="#note_469" id="noteref_469" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">469</span></span></a> that
          he offered sacrifice in the temple,<a href="#note_470" id="noteref_470" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">470</span></span></a> that
          he shaved his head with Aquila and Priscilla at Corinth;<a href="#note_471" id="noteref_471" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">471</span></span></a> for
          no other advantage than to avoid giving offence to the Jews. Hence
          it was, that James said to the same Paul, <span class="tei tei-q">‘Thou seest, brother, how many thousands of Jews there
          are which believe; and they are all zealous of the
          Law.’</span><a href="#note_472" id="noteref_472" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">472</span></span></a> And
          yet, at this time, when the light of the Gospel is spreading
          throughout the world, it is needless, nay, it is not lawful, for
          the faithful either to be circumcised, or to offer up to God
          sacrifices of flesh. So John, according to the custom of the Law,
          began the celebration of the feast of Easter, on the fourteenth day
          of the first month, in the evening, not regarding whether the same
          happened on a Saturday, or any other week-day. But when Peter
          preached at Rome, being mindful that our Lord arose from the dead,
          and gave to the world the hope of resurrection, on the first day of
          the week, he perceived that Easter ought to be kept after this
          manner: he always awaited the rising of the moon on the fourteenth
          day of the first month in the evening, according to the custom and
          precepts of the Law, even as John did. And when that came, if the
          Lord's day, then called the first day of the week, was the next
          day, he began that very evening to celebrate Easter, as we all do
          at the present time. But if the Lord's day did not fall the next
          morning after the fourteenth moon, but on the sixteenth, or the
          seventeenth, or any other moon till the twenty-first, he waited for
          that, and on the Saturday before, in the evening, began to observe
          the holy solemnity of Easter. Thus it came <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page198">[pg 198]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg198"/> to pass, that Easter Sunday was only kept
          from the fifteenth moon to the twenty-first. Nor does this
          evangelical and apostolic tradition abolish the Law, but rather
          fulfil it; the command being to keep the passover from the
          fourteenth moon of the first month in the evening to the
          twenty-first moon of the same month in the evening; which
          observance all the successors of the blessed John in Asia, since
          his death, and all the Church throughout the world, have since
          followed; and that this is the true Easter, and the only one to be
          celebrated by the faithful, was not newly decreed by the council of
          Nicaea, but only confirmed afresh; as the history of the Church
          informs us.<a href="#note_473" id="noteref_473" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">473</span></span></a></span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Thus it is plain, that you, Colman, neither follow the
          example of John, as you imagine, nor that of Peter, whose tradition
          you oppose with full knowledge, and that you neither agree with the
          Law nor the Gospel in the keeping of your Easter. For John, keeping
          the Paschal time according to the decree of the Mosaic Law, had no
          regard to the first day of the week, which you do not practise,
          seeing that you celebrate Easter only on the first day after the
          Sabbath. Peter celebrated Easter Sunday between the fifteenth and
          the twenty-first moon, which you do not practise, seeing that you
          observe Easter Sunday from the fourteenth to the twentieth moon; so
          that you often begin Easter on the thirteenth moon in the evening,
          whereof neither the Law made any mention, nor did our Lord, the
          Author and Giver of the Gospel, on that day either eat the old
          passover in the evening, or deliver the Sacraments of the New
          Testament, to be celebrated by the Church, in memory of His
          Passion, but on the fourteenth. Besides, in your celebration of
          Easter, you utterly exclude the twenty-first moon, which the Law
          ordered to be specially observed. Thus, as I have said before, you
          agree neither with John nor Peter, nor with the Law, nor the
          Gospel, in the celebration of the greatest festival.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">To this Colman
          rejoined: <span class="tei tei-q">“Did the holy Anatolius,<a href="#note_474" id="noteref_474" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">474</span></span></a>
<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page199">[pg 199]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg199"/> much commended in
          the history of the Church, judge contrary to the Law and the
          Gospel, when he wrote, that Easter was to be celebrated from the
          fourteenth to the twentieth moon? Is it to be believed that our
          most reverend Father Columba and his successors, men beloved by
          God, who kept Easter after the same manner, judged or acted
          contrary to the Divine writings? Whereas there were many among
          them, whose sanctity was attested by heavenly signs and miracles
          which they wrought; whom I, for my part, doubt not to be saints,
          and whose life, customs, and discipline I never cease to
          follow.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“It is evident,”</span> said Wilfrid, <span class="tei tei-q">“that Anatolius was a most holy, learned, and
          commendable man; but what have you to do with him, since you do not
          observe his decrees? For he undoubtedly, following the rule of
          truth in his Easter, appointed a cycle of nineteen years, which
          either you are ignorant of, or if you know it, though it is kept by
          the whole Church of Christ, yet you despise it as a thing of
          naught. He so computed the fourteenth moon in our Lord's Paschal
          Feast, that according to the custom of the Egyptians, he
          acknowledged it to be the fifteenth moon on that same day in the
          evening; so in like manner he assigned the twentieth to
          Easter-Sunday, as believing that to be the twenty-first moon, when
          the sun had set. That you are ignorant of the rule of this
          distinction is proved by this, that you sometimes manifestly keep
          Easter before the full moon, that is, on the thirteenth day.
          Concerning your Father Columba and his followers, whose sanctity
          you say you imitate, and whose rule and precepts confirmed by signs
          from Heaven you say that you follow, I might answer, then when
          many, in the day of judgement, shall say to our Lord, that in His
          name they have prophesied, and have cast out devils, and done many
          wonderful works, our Lord will reply, that He never knew them. But
          far be it from me to speak thus of your fathers, for it is much
          more just to believe good than evil of those whom we know not.
          Wherefore I do not deny those also to have been God's servants, and
          beloved of God, who with rude <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page200">[pg 200]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg200"/> simplicity, but pious intentions, have
          themselves loved Him. Nor do I think that such observance of Easter
          did them much harm, as long as none came to show them a more
          perfect rule to follow; for assuredly I believe that, if any
          teacher, reckoning after the Catholic manner, had come among them,
          they would have as readily followed his admonitions, as they are
          known to have kept those commandments of God, which they had
          learned and knew.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But as for you and your companions, you certainly sin,
          if, having heard the decrees of the Apostolic see, nay, of the
          universal Church, confirmed, as they are, by Holy Scripture, you
          scorn to follow them; for, though your fathers were holy, do you
          think that those few men, in a corner of the remotest island, are
          to be preferred before the universal Church of Christ throughout
          the world? And if that Columba of yours, (and, I may say, ours
          also, if he was Christ's servant,) was a holy man and powerful in
          miracles, yet could he be preferred before the most blessed chief
          of the Apostles, to whom our Lord said, <span class="tei tei-q">‘Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my
          Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it, and I
          will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of
          Heaven?’</span> ”</span><a href="#note_475" id="noteref_475" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">475</span></span></a></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">When Wilfrid had
          ended thus, the king said, <span class="tei tei-q">“Is it true,
          Colman, that these words were spoken to Peter by our Lord?”</span>
          He answered, <span class="tei tei-q">“It is true, O king!”</span>
          Then said he, <span class="tei tei-q">“Can you show any such power
          given to your Columba?”</span> Colman answered, <span class="tei tei-q">“None.”</span> Then again the king asked, <span class="tei tei-q">“Do you both agree in this, without any controversy,
          that these words were said above all to Peter, and that the keys of
          the kingdom of Heaven were given to him by our Lord?”</span> They
          both answered, <span class="tei tei-q">“Yes.”</span> Then the king
          concluded, <span class="tei tei-q">“And I also say unto you, that
          he is the door-keeper, and I will not gainsay him, but I desire, as
          far as I know and am able, in all things to obey his laws, lest
          haply when I come to the gates of the kingdom of Heaven, there
          should be <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page201">[pg
          201]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg201"/>
          none to open them, he being my adversary who is proved to have the
          keys.”</span> The king having said this, all who were seated there
          or standing by, both great and small, gave their assent, and
          renouncing the less perfect custom, hastened to conform to that
          which they had found to be better.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc175"/> <a id="pdf176"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_III_Chap_XXVI"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XXVI. How Colman, being
          worsted, returned home; and Tuda succeeded him in the bishopric;
          and of the state of the church under those teachers. [664</span>
<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The disputation
          being ended, and the assembly broken up, Agilbert returned home.
          Colman, perceiving that his doctrine was rejected, and his party
          despised, took with him those who wished to follow him, to wit,
          such as would not accept the Catholic Easter and the tonsure in the
          form of a crown,<a href="#note_476" id="noteref_476" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">476</span></span></a> (for
          there was no small dispute about that also,) and went back into
          Scotland,<a href="#note_477" id="noteref_477" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">477</span></span></a> to
          consult with his people what was to be done in this case. Cedd,
          forsaking the practices of the Scots, returned to his bishopric,
          having submitted to the Catholic observance of Easter. This debate
          took place in the year of our Lord 664, which was the twenty-second
          year of the reign of King Oswy, and the thirtieth of the episcopate
          of the Scots among the English; for Aidan was bishop seventeen
          years, Finan ten, and Colman three.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">When Colman had
          gone back into his own country, Tuda, the servant of Christ, was
          made bishop of the Northumbrians<a href="#note_478" id="noteref_478" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">478</span></span></a> in
          his place, having been instructed and ordained bishop among the
          Southern Scots, having also the crown of the ecclesiastical
          tonsure, according to the custom of that province, and observing
          the Catholic rule with regard to the time of Easter.<a href="#note_479" id="noteref_479" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">479</span></span></a> He
          was a good and religious man, but he governed the church a very
          short time; he had come from Scotland<a href="#note_480" id="noteref_480" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">480</span></span></a>
          whilst Colman was <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page202">[pg
          202]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg202"/>
          yet bishop, and, both by word and deed, diligently taught all men
          those things that appertain to the faith and truth. But Eata,<a href="#note_481" id="noteref_481" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">481</span></span></a> who
          was abbot of the monastery called Mailros,<a href="#note_482" id="noteref_482" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">482</span></span></a> a man
          most reverend and gentle, was appointed abbot over the brethren
          that chose to remain in the church of Lindisfarne, when the Scots
          went away. It is said that Colman, upon his departure, requested
          and obtained this of King Oswy, because Eata was one of Aidan's
          twelve boys of the English nation,<a href="#note_483" id="noteref_483" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">483</span></span></a> whom
          he received in the early years of his episcopate, to be instructed
          in Christ; for the king greatly loved Bishop Colman on account of
          his innate discretion. This is that Eata, who, not long after, was
          made bishop of the same church of Lindisfarne. Colman carried home
          with him part of the bones of the most reverend Father Aidan, and
          left part of them in the church where he had presided, ordering
          them to be interred in the sacristy.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The place which
          they governed shows how frugal and temperate he and his
          predecessors were, for there were very few houses besides the
          church found at their departure; indeed, no more than were barely
          sufficient to make civilized life possible; they had also no money,
          but only cattle; for if they received any money from rich persons,
          they immediately gave it to the poor; there being no need to gather
          money, or provide houses for the entertainment of the great men of
          the world; for such never resorted to the church, except to pray
          and hear the Word of God. The king himself, when occasion required,
          came only with five or six servants, and having performed his
          devotions in the church, departed. But if they happened to take a
          repast there, they were satisfied with the plain, daily food of the
          brethren, and <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page203">[pg
          203]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg203"/>
          required no more. For the whole care of those teachers was to serve
          God, not the world—to feed the soul, and not the belly.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">For this reason
          the religious habit was at that time held in great veneration; so
          that wheresoever any clerk or monk went, he was joyfully received
          by all men, as God's servant; and even if they chanced to meet him
          upon the way, they ran to him, and with bowed head, were glad to be
          signed with the cross by his hand, or blessed by his lips. Great
          attention was also paid to their exhortations; and on Sundays they
          flocked eagerly to the church, or the monasteries, not to feed
          their bodies, but to hear the Word of God; and if any priest
          happened to come into a village, the inhabitants came together and
          asked of him the Word of life; for the priests and clerks went to
          the villages for no other reason than to preach, baptize, visit the
          sick, and, in a word, to take care of souls; and they were so
          purified from all taint of avarice, that none of them received
          lands and possessions for building monasteries, unless they were
          compelled to do so by the temporal authorities; which custom was
          for some time after universally observed in the churches of the
          Northumbrians. But enough has now been said on this subject.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc177"/> <a id="pdf178"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_III_Chap_XXVII"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XXVII. How Egbert, a holy man
          of the English nation, led a monastic life in Ireland. [664</span>
<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the same year
          of our Lord 664, there happened an eclipse of the sun, on the third
          day of May,<a href="#note_484" id="noteref_484" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">484</span></span></a> about
          the tenth hour of the day. In the same year, a sudden
          pestilence<a href="#note_485" id="noteref_485" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">485</span></span></a>
          depopulated first the southern parts of <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page204">[pg 204]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg204"/> Britain, and afterwards attacking the
          province of the Northumbrians, ravaged the country far and near,
          and destroyed a great multitude of men. By this plague the
          aforesaid priest of the Lord, Tuda,<a href="#note_486" id="noteref_486" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">486</span></span></a> was
          carried off, and was honourably buried in the monastery called
          Paegnalaech.<a href="#note_487" id="noteref_487" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">487</span></span></a>
          Moreover, this plague prevailed no less disastrously in the island
          of Ireland. Many of the nobility, and of the lower ranks of the
          English nation, were there at that time, who, in the days of the
          Bishops Finan and Colman, forsaking their native island, retired
          thither, either for the sake of sacred studies, or of a more
          ascetic life; and some of them presently devoted themselves
          faithfully to a monastic life, others chose rather to apply
          themselves to study, going about from one master's cell to another.
          The Scots willingly received them all, and took care to supply them
          with daily food without cost, as also to furnish them with books
          for their studies, and teaching free of charge.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Among these were
          Ethelhun and Egbert,<a href="#note_488" id="noteref_488" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">488</span></span></a> two
          youths of great capacity, of the English nobility. The former of
          whom was brother to Ethelwin,<a href="#note_489" id="noteref_489" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">489</span></span></a> a man
          no less beloved by God, who also at a later time went over into
          Ireland to study, and having been well instructed, returned into
          his own country, and being made bishop in the province of Lindsey,
          long and nobly governed the Church. These two being in the
          monastery which in the language of the Scots is called
          Rathmelsigi,<a href="#note_490" id="noteref_490" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">490</span></span></a> and
          having lost all their companions, who were either cut off by the
          plague, or dispersed into other places, were both seized by the
          same sickness, and grievously afflicted. Of these, Egbert, (as I
          was informed by a priest venerable for his <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page205">[pg 205]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg205"/> age, and of great veracity, who declared he
          had heard the story from his own lips,) concluding that he was at
          the point of death, went out of the chamber, where the sick lay, in
          the morning, and sitting alone in a fitting place, began seriously
          to reflect upon his past actions, and, being full of compunction at
          the remembrance of his sins, bedewed his face with tears, and
          prayed fervently to God that he might not die yet, before he could
          forthwith more fully make amends for the careless offences which he
          had committed in his boyhood and infancy, or might further exercise
          himself in good works. He also made a vow that he would spend all
          his life abroad and never return into the island of Britain, where
          he was born; that besides singing the psalms at the canonical
          hours, he would, unless prevented by bodily infirmity, repeat the
          whole Psalter daily to the praise of God; and that he would every
          week fast one whole day and night. Returning home, after his tears
          and prayers and vows, he found his companion asleep; and going to
          bed himself, he began to compose himself to rest. When he had lain
          quiet awhile, his comrade awaking, looked on him, and said,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Alas! Brother Egbert, what have you done?
          I was in hopes that we should have entered together into life
          everlasting; but know that your prayer is granted.”</span> For he
          had learned in a vision what the other had requested, and that he
          had obtained his request.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In brief,
          Ethelhun died the next night; but Egbert, throwing off his
          sickness, recovered and lived a long time after to grace the
          episcopal office, which he received, by deeds worthy of it;<a href="#note_491" id="noteref_491" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">491</span></span></a> and
          blessed with many virtues, according to his desire, lately, in the
          year of our Lord 729, being ninety years of age, he departed to the
          heavenly kingdom. He passed his life in great perfection of
          humility, gentleness, continence, simplicity, and justice. Thus he
          was a great benefactor, both to his own people, and to those
          nations of the Scots and Picts among whom he lived in exile, by the
          example of <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page206">[pg
          206]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg206"/>
          his life, his earnestness in teaching, his authority in reproving,
          and his piety in giving away of those things which he received from
          the rich. He also added this to the vows which we have mentioned:
          during Lent, he would eat but one meal a day, allowing himself
          nothing but bread and thin milk, and even that by measure. The
          milk, new the day before, he kept in a vessel, and skimming off the
          cream in the morning, drank the rest, as has been said, with a
          little bread. Which sort of abstinence he likewise always observed
          forty days before the Nativity of our Lord, and as many after the
          solemnity of Pentecost, that is, of the fifty days' festival.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc179"/> <a id="pdf180"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_III_Chap_XXVIII"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XXVIII. How, when Tuda was
          dead, Wilfrid was ordained, in Gaul, and Ceadda, among the West
          Saxons, to be bishops for the province of the Northumbrians.
          [664</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the meantime,
          King Alchfrid sent the priest, Wilfrid, to the king of Gaul,<a href="#note_492" id="noteref_492" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">492</span></span></a> in
          order that he should cause him to be consecrated bishop for himself
          and his people. That prince sent him to be ordained by
          Agilbert,<a href="#note_493" id="noteref_493" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">493</span></span></a> of
          whom we have before spoken, and who, having left Britain, was made
          bishop of the city of Paris;<a href="#note_494" id="noteref_494" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">494</span></span></a> and
          by him Wilfrid was honourably consecrated, several bishops meeting
          together for that purpose in a village belonging to the king,
          called In Compendio.<a href="#note_495" id="noteref_495" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">495</span></span></a> He
          stayed some <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page207">[pg
          207]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg207"/>
          time in the parts beyond the sea for his ordination, and King Oswy,
          following the example of his son's zeal, sent into Kent a holy man,
          of modest character, well read in the Scripture, and diligently
          practising those things which he had learned therein, to be
          ordained bishop of the church of York. This was a priest called
          Ceadda,<a href="#note_496" id="noteref_496" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">496</span></span></a>
          brother to the most reverend prelate Cedd, of whom mention has been
          often made, and abbot of the monastery of Laestingaeu. With him the
          king also sent his priest Eadhaed,<a href="#note_497" id="noteref_497" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">497</span></span></a> who
          was afterwards, in the reign of Egfrid,<a href="#note_498" id="noteref_498" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">498</span></span></a> made
          bishop of the church of Ripon. Now when they arrived in Kent, they
          found that Archbishop Deusdedit had departed this life, and no
          other bishop was as yet appointed in his place; whereupon they
          betook themselves to the province of the West Saxons, where Wini
          was bishop, and by him Ceadda was consecrated; two bishops of the
          British nation, who kept Easter Sunday, as has been often said,
          contrary to the canonical manner, from the fourteenth to the
          twentieth moon, being called in to assist at the ordination; for at
          that time there was no other bishop in all Britain canonically
          ordained, except Wini.<a href="#note_499" id="noteref_499" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">499</span></span></a></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">So Ceadda, being
          consecrated bishop, began immediately to labour for ecclesiastical
          truth and purity of <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page208">[pg
          208]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg208"/>
          doctrine; to apply himself to humility, self-denial, and study; to
          travel about, not on horseback, but after the manner of the
          Apostles, on foot, to preach the Gospel in towns, the open country,
          cottages, villages, and castles; for he was one of the disciples of
          Aidan, and endeavoured to instruct his people by the same manner of
          life and character, after his and his own brother Cedd's example.
          Wilfrid also having been now made a bishop, came into Britain, and
          in like manner by his teaching brought into the English Church many
          rules of Catholic observance. Whence it followed, that the Catholic
          principles daily gained strength, and all the Scots that dwelt in
          England either conformed to these, or returned into their own
          country.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc181"/> <a id="pdf182"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_III_Chap_XXIX"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XXIX. How the priest Wighard
          was sent from Britain to Rome, to be ordained archbishop; of his
          death there, and of the letters of the Apostolic Pope giving an
          account thereof. [667</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At this time the
          most noble kings of the English, Oswy, of the province of the
          Northumbrians, and Egbert of Kent, consulted together to determine
          what ought to be done about the state of the English Church, for
          Oswy, though educated by the Scots, had rightly perceived that the
          Roman was the Catholic and Apostolic Church. They selected, with
          the consent and by the choice of the holy Church of the English
          nation, a priest named Wighard,<a href="#note_500" id="noteref_500" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">500</span></span></a> one
          of Bishop Deusdedit's clergy, a good man and fitted for the
          episcopate, and sent him to Rome to be ordained bishop, to the end
          that, having been raised to the rank of an archbishop, he might
          ordain Catholic prelates for the Churches of the English nation
          throughout all Britain. But Wighard, arriving at Rome, was cut off
          by death, before he could be consecrated bishop, and the following
          letter was sent back into Britain to King Oswy:—</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">To the most excellent lord, our son, Oswy,
          king of the</span> <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page209">[pg
          209]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg209"/><span style="font-style: italic">Saxons,
          Vitalian,</span><a href="#note_501" id="noteref_501" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; font-style: italic; vertical-align: super">501</span></span></a>
<span style="font-style: italic">bishop, servant of the servants of
          God.</span></span> We have received to our comfort your
          Excellency's letters; by reading whereof we are acquainted with
          your most pious devotion and fervent love of the blessed life; and
          know that by the protecting hand of God you have been converted to
          the true and Apostolic faith, in hope that even as you reign in
          your own nation, so you may hereafter reign with Christ. Blessed be
          the nation, therefore, that has been found worthy to have as its
          king one so wise and a worshipper of God; forasmuch as he is not
          himself alone a worshipper of God, but also studies day and night
          the conversion of all his subjects to the Catholic and Apostolic
          faith, to the redemption of his own soul. Who would not rejoice at
          hearing such glad tidings? Who would not exult and be joyful at
          these good works? For your nation has believed in Christ the
          Almighty God, according to the words of the Divine prophets, as it
          is written in Isaiah, <span class="tei tei-q">‘In that day there
          shall be a root of Jesse, which shall stand for an ensign of the
          people; to it shall the Gentiles seek.’</span><a href="#note_502" id="noteref_502" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">502</span></span></a> And
          again, <span class="tei tei-q">‘Listen, O isles, unto me, and
          hearken ye people from far.’</span><a href="#note_503" id="noteref_503" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">503</span></span></a> And a
          little after, <span class="tei tei-q">‘It is a light thing that
          thou shouldst be my servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to
          restore the outcast of Israel. I have given thee for a light to the
          Gentiles, that thou mayst be my salvation unto the end of the
          earth.’</span><a href="#note_504" id="noteref_504" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">504</span></span></a> And
          again, <span class="tei tei-q">‘Kings shall see, princes also shall
          arise and worship.’</span><a href="#note_505" id="noteref_505" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">505</span></span></a> And
          immediately after, <span class="tei tei-q">‘I have given thee for a
          covenant of the people, to establish the earth, and possess the
          scattered heritages; that thou mayest say to the prisoners, Go
          forth; to them that are in darkness, Show yourselves.’</span><a href="#note_506" id="noteref_506" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">506</span></span></a> And
          again, <span class="tei tei-q">‘I the Lord have called thee in
          righteousness, and have held thine hand, and have kept thee, and
          have given thee for a covenant of the people, for a light of the
          Gentiles; to open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoner from
          the prison, and them that sit in darkness from the
          prison-house.’</span><a href="#note_507" id="noteref_507" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">507</span></span></a></span></p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page210">[pg 210]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg210"/>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Behold, most excellent son, how it is plain as day
          that it was prophesied not only of you, but also of all the
          nations, that they should believe in Christ, the Creator of all
          things. Wherefore it behoves your Highness, as being a member of
          Christ, in all things continually to follow the pious rule of the
          chief of the Apostles, in celebrating Easter, and in all things
          delivered by the holy Apostles, Peter and Paul, whose doctrine
          daily enlightens the hearts of believers, even as the two lights of
          heaven illumine the world.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">And after some
          lines, wherein he speaks of celebrating the true Easter uniformly
          throughout all the world,—</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Finally,”</span> he adds, <span class="tei tei-q">“we
          have not been able now, on account of the length of the journey, to
          find a man, apt to teach, and qualified in all respects to be a
          bishop, according to the tenor of your letters.<a href="#note_508" id="noteref_508" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">508</span></span></a> But,
          assuredly, as soon as such a fit person shall be found, we will
          send him well instructed to your country, that he may, by word of
          mouth, and through the Divine oracles, with the blessing of God,
          root out all the enemy's tares throughout your island. We have
          received the presents sent by your Highness to the blessed chief of
          the Apostles, for an eternal memorial of him, and return you
          thanks, and always pray for your safety with the clergy of Christ.
          But he that brought these presents has been removed out of this
          world, and is buried at the threshold of the Apostles, for whom we
          have been much grieved, because he died here. Nevertheless, we have
          caused the blessed gifts of the saints, that is, the relics of the
          blessed Apostles, Peter and Paul, and of the holy martyrs,
          Laurentius, John, and Paul, and Gregory, and Pancratius,<a href="#note_509" id="noteref_509" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">509</span></span></a> to be
          given to your servants, the bearers of <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page211">[pg 211]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg211"/> these our letters, to be by them delivered to
          your Excellency. And to your consort<a href="#note_510" id="noteref_510" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">510</span></span></a> also,
          our spiritual daughter, we have by the aforesaid bearers sent a
          cross, with a gold key to it, made out of the most holy chains of
          the blessed Apostles, Peter and Paul; for, hearing of her pious
          zeal, all the Apostolic see rejoices with us, even as her pious
          works smell sweet and blossom before God.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“We therefore desire that your Highness should hasten,
          according to our wish, to dedicate all your island to Christ our
          God; for assuredly you have for your Protector, the Redeemer of
          mankind, our Lord Jesus Christ, Who will prosper you in all things,
          that you may gather together a new people of Christ, establishing
          there the Catholic and Apostolic faith. For it is written,
          <span class="tei tei-q">‘Seek ye first the kingdom of God and His
          righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto
          you.’</span><a href="#note_511" id="noteref_511" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">511</span></span></a> Truly
          your Highness seeks, and shall obtain, and all your islands shall
          be made subject to you, even as we desire. Saluting your Excellency
          with fatherly affection, we never cease to pray to the Divine
          Goodness, to vouchsafe to assist you and yours in all good works,
          that you may reign with Christ in the world to come. May the
          Heavenly Grace preserve your Excellency in safety!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the next book
          we shall have a more suitable occasion to show who was selected and
          consecrated in Wighard's place.</p>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page212">[pg 212]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg212"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc183"/> <a id="pdf184"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_III_Chap_XXX"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XXX. How the East Saxons,
          during a pestilence, returned to idolatry, but were soon brought
          back from their error by the zeal of Bishop Jaruman. [665</span>
<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At the same
          time, the Kings Sighere and Sebbi,<a href="#note_512" id="noteref_512" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">512</span></span></a>
          though themselves subject to Wulfhere, king of the Mercians,
          governed the province of the East Saxons after Suidhelm, of whom we
          have spoken above.<a href="#note_513" id="noteref_513" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">513</span></span></a> When
          that province was suffering from the aforesaid disastrous plague,
          Sighere, with his part of the people, forsook the mysteries of the
          Christian faith, and turned apostate. For the king himself, and
          many of the commons and nobles, loving this life, and not seeking
          after another, or even not believing in any other, began to restore
          the temples that had been abandoned, and to adore idols, as if they
          might by those means be protected against the plague. But Sebbi,
          his companion and co-heir in the kingdom, with all his people, very
          devoutly preserved the faith which he had received, and, as we
          shall show hereafter, ended his faithful life in great
          felicity.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">King Wulfhere,
          hearing that the faith of the province was in part profaned, sent
          Bishop Jaruman,<a href="#note_514" id="noteref_514" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">514</span></span></a> who
          was successor to Trumhere, to correct their error, and recall the
          province to the true faith. He acted with much discretion, as I was
          informed by a priest who bore him company in that journey, and had
          been his fellow labourer in the Word, for he was a religious and
          good man, and travelling through all the country, far and near,
          brought back both the people and the aforesaid king to the way of
          righteousness, so that, either forsaking or destroying the temples
          and altars which they had erected, they opened the churches, and
          gladly confessed the Name of Christ, which they had opposed,
          choosing rather to die in the faith of resurrection in Him, than to
          live in the abominations of unbelief among their idols. Having thus
          accomplished their works, the priests and teachers returned home
          with joy.</p>
</div>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page213">[pg 213]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg213"/>
<hr class="page"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 5.00em; margin-top: 5.00em">
<a id="toc185"/> <a id="pdf186"/>
<h1 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 3.46em; margin-top: 3.46em">
<span style="font-size: 173%">Book IV</span></h1>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc187"/> <a id="pdf188"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_IV_Chap_I"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. I. How when Deusdedit died,
          Wighard was sent to Rome to receive the episcopate; but he dying
          there, Theodore was ordained archbishop, and sent into Britain with
          the Abbot Hadrian. [664-669</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the
          above-mentioned year of the aforesaid eclipse<a href="#note_515" id="noteref_515" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">515</span></span></a> and
          of the pestilence which followed it immediately, in which also
          Bishop Colman, being overcome by the united effort of the
          Catholics, returned home,<a href="#note_516" id="noteref_516" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">516</span></span></a>
          Deusdedit,<a href="#note_517" id="noteref_517" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">517</span></span></a> the
          sixth bishop of the church of Canterbury, died on the 14th of July.
          Earconbert,<a href="#note_518" id="noteref_518" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">518</span></span></a> also,
          king of Kent, departed this life the same month and day; leaving
          his kingdom to his son Egbert, who held it for nine years. The see
          then became vacant for no small time, until, the priest
          Wighard,<a href="#note_519" id="noteref_519" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">519</span></span></a> a man
          of great learning in the teaching of the Church, of the English
          race, was sent to Rome by King Egbert and Oswy, king of the
          Northumbrians, as was briefly mentioned in the foregoing
          book,<a href="#note_520" id="noteref_520" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">520</span></span></a> with
          a request that he might be ordained Archbishop of the Church of
          England; and at the same time presents were sent to the Apostolic
          pope, and many vessels of gold and silver. Arriving at Rome, where
          Vitalian<a href="#note_521" id="noteref_521" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">521</span></span></a>
          presided at that time over the Apostolic see, and having made known
          to the aforesaid Apostolic pope the occasion of his journey, he was
          not long after carried off, with almost all his companions who had
          come with him, by a pestilence which fell upon them.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But the
          Apostolic pope having consulted about that matter, made diligent
          inquiry for some one to send to be <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page214">[pg 214]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg214"/> archbishop of the English Churches. There was
          then in the monastery of Niridanum, which is not far from Naples in
          Campania, an abbot called Hadrian,<a href="#note_522" id="noteref_522" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">522</span></span></a> by
          nation an African, well versed in Holy Scripture, trained in
          monastic and ecclesiastical teaching, and excellently skilled both
          in the Greek and Latin tongues. The pope, sending for him,
          commanded him to accept the bishopric and go to Britain. He
          answered, that he was unworthy of so great a dignity, but said that
          he could name another, whose learning and age were fitter for the
          episcopal office. He proposed to the pope a certain monk named
          Andrew, belonging to a neighbouring nunnery<a href="#note_523" id="noteref_523" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">523</span></span></a> and
          he was by all that knew him judged worthy of a bishopric; but the
          weight of bodily infirmity prevented him from becoming a bishop.
          Then again Hadrian was urged to accept the episcopate; but he
          desired a respite, to see whether in time he could find another to
          be ordained bishop.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">There was at
          that time in Rome, a monk, called Theodore,<a href="#note_524" id="noteref_524" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">524</span></span></a> known
          to Hadrian, born at Tarsus in Cilicia, a man instructed in secular
          and Divine writings, as also in Greek and Latin; of high character
          and venerable age, being sixty-six years old. Hadrian proposed him
          to the pope to be ordained bishop, and prevailed; but upon the
          condition that he should himself conduct him into Britain, because
          he had already travelled through Gaul twice upon different
          occasions, and was, therefore, better acquainted with the way, and
          was, moreover, sufficiently provided with men of his own; as also,
          to the end that, being his fellow labourer in teaching, he might
          take special care that Theodore should not, according to the custom
          of the Greeks, introduce any thing contrary to the truth of the
          faith into the Church where he presided.<a href="#note_525" id="noteref_525" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">525</span></span></a>
          Theodore, being ordained subdeacon, waited four months for his hair
          to grow, that it might be shorn into the shape of a <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page215">[pg 215]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg215"/> crown; for he had before the tonsure of
          St. Paul,<a href="#note_526" id="noteref_526" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">526</span></span></a> the
          Apostle, after the manner of the eastern people. He was ordained by
          Pope Vitalian, in the year of our Lord 668, on Sunday, the 26th of
          March, and on the 27th of May was sent with Hadrian to
          Britain.<a href="#note_527" id="noteref_527" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">527</span></span></a></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">They proceeded
          together by sea to Marseilles, and thence by land to Arles, and
          having there delivered to John, archbishop of that city,<a href="#note_528" id="noteref_528" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">528</span></span></a> Pope
          Vitalian's letters of recommendation, were by him detained till
          Ebroin,<a href="#note_529" id="noteref_529" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">529</span></span></a> the
          king's mayor of the palace, gave them leave to go where they
          pleased. Having received the same, Theodore went to Agilbert,
          bishop of Paris,<a href="#note_530" id="noteref_530" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">530</span></span></a> of
          whom we have spoken above, and was by him kindly received, and long
          entertained. But Hadrian went first to Emme, Bishop of the
          Senones,<a href="#note_531" id="noteref_531" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">531</span></span></a> and
          then to Faro,<a href="#note_532" id="noteref_532" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">532</span></span></a>
          bishop of the Meldi, and lived in comfort with them a considerable
          time; for the approach of winter had obliged them to rest wherever
          they could. King Egbert, being informed by sure messengers that the
          bishop they had asked of the Roman prelate was in the kingdom of
          the Franks, sent thither his reeve,<a href="#note_533" id="noteref_533" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">533</span></span></a>
          Raedfrid, to conduct him. He, having arrived there, with Ebroin's
          leave took Theodore and conveyed him to the port called
          Quentavic;<a href="#note_534" id="noteref_534" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">534</span></span></a>
          where, falling sick, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page216">[pg
          216]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg216"/>
          he stayed some time, and as soon as he began to recover, sailed
          over into Britain. But Ebroin detained Hadrian, suspecting that he
          went on some mission from the Emperor to the kings of Britain, to
          the prejudice of the kingdom of which he at that time had the chief
          charge; however, when he found that in truth he had never had any
          such commission, he discharged him, and permitted him to follow
          Theodore. As soon as he came to him, Theodore gave him the
          monastery of the blessed Peter the Apostle,<a href="#note_535" id="noteref_535" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">535</span></span></a> where
          the archbishops of Canterbury are wont to be buried, as I have said
          before; for at his departure, the Apostolic lord had enjoined upon
          Theodore that he should provide for him in his province, and give
          him a suitable place to live in with his followers.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc189"/> <a id="pdf190"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_IV_Chap_II"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. II. How Theodore visited all
          places; how the Churches of the English began to be instructed in
          the study of Holy Scripture, and in the Catholic truth; and how
          Putta was made bishop of the Church of Rochester in the room of
          Damianus. [669</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Theodore came to
          his Church in the second year after his consecration, on Sunday,
          the 27th of May, and spent in it twenty-one years, three months,
          and twenty-six days. Soon after, he visited all the island,
          wherever the tribes of the English dwelt, for he was gladly
          received and heard by all persons; and everywhere attended and
          assisted by Hadrian, he taught the right rule of life, and the
          canonical custom of celebrating Easter. This was the first
          archbishop whom all the English Church consented to obey. And
          forasmuch as both of them were, as has been said before, fully
          instructed both in sacred and in secular letters, they gathered a
          crowd of disciples, and rivers of wholesome knowledge daily flowed
          from them to water the hearts of their hearers; and, together with
          the books of Holy Scripture, they also taught them <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page217">[pg 217]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg217"/> the metrical art, astronomy, and
          ecclesiastical arithmetic. A testimony whereof is, that there are
          still living at this day some of their scholars, who are as well
          versed in the Greek and Latin tongues as in their own, in which
          they were born. Nor were there ever happier times since the English
          came into Britain; for having brave Christian kings, they were a
          terror to all barbarous nations, and the minds of all men were bent
          upon the joys of the heavenly kingdom of which they had but lately
          heard; and all who desired to be instructed in sacred studies had
          masters at hand to teach them.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">From that time
          also they began in all the churches of the English to learn Church
          music, which till then had been only known in Kent. And, excepting
          James, of whom we have spoken above,<a href="#note_536" id="noteref_536" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">536</span></span></a> the
          first teacher of singing in the churches of the Northumbrians was
          Eddi, surnamed Stephen,<a href="#note_537" id="noteref_537" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">537</span></span></a>
          invited from Kent by the most reverend Wilfrid, who was the first
          of the bishops of the English nation that learned to deliver to the
          churches of the English the Catholic manner of life.<a href="#note_538" id="noteref_538" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">538</span></span></a></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Theodore,
          journeying through all parts, ordained bishops in fitting places,
          and with their assistance corrected such things as he found faulty.
          Among the rest, when he charged Bishop Ceadda with not having been
          duly consecrated,<a href="#note_539" id="noteref_539" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">539</span></span></a> he,
          with great humility, answered, <span class="tei tei-q">“If you know
          that I have not duly received episcopal ordination, I willingly
          resign the office, for I never thought myself worthy of it; but,
          though unworthy, for obedience sake I submitted, when bidden to
          undertake it.”</span> Theodore, hearing his humble answer, said
          that he should not resign the bishopric, and he himself completed
          his ordination after the Catholic manner. Now at the time when
          Deusdedit died, and a bishop for the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page218">[pg 218]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg218"/> church of Canterbury was by request ordained
          and sent, Wilfrid was also sent from Britain into Gaul to be
          ordained; and because he returned before Theodore, he ordained
          priests and deacons in Kent till the archbishop should come to his
          see. But when Theodore came to the city of Rochester, where the
          bishopric had been long vacant by the death of Damian,<a href="#note_540" id="noteref_540" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">540</span></span></a> he
          ordained a man named Putta,<a href="#note_541" id="noteref_541" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">541</span></span></a>
          trained rather in the teaching of the Church and more addicted to
          simplicity of life than active in worldly affairs, but specially
          skilful in Church music, after the Roman use, which he had learned
          from the disciples of the blessed Pope Gregory.<a href="#note_542" id="noteref_542" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">542</span></span></a></p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc191"/> <a id="pdf192"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_IV_Chap_III"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. III. How the above-mentioned
          Ceadda was made Bishop of the province of Mercians. Of his life,
          death, and burial. [669</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At that time,
          the province of the Mercians was governed by King Wulfhere, who, on
          the death of Jaruman,<a href="#note_543" id="noteref_543" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">543</span></span></a>
          desired of Theodore that a bishop should be given to him and his
          people; but Theodore would not ordain a new one for them, but
          requested of King Oswy that Ceadda might be their bishop. He then
          lived in retirement at his monastery, which is at
          Laestingaeu,<a href="#note_544" id="noteref_544" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">544</span></span></a> while
          Wilfrid administered the bishopric of York, and of all <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page219">[pg 219]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg219"/> the Northumbrians, and likewise of the
          Picts, as far as King Oswy was able to extend his dominions. And,
          seeing that it was the custom of that most reverend prelate to go
          about the work of the Gospel everywhere on foot rather than on
          horseback, Theodore commanded him to ride whenever he had a long
          journey to undertake; and finding him very unwilling, in his zeal
          and love for his pious labour, he himself, with his own hands,
          lifted him on horseback; for he knew him to be a holy man, and
          therefore obliged him to ride wherever he had need to go. Ceadda
          having received the bishopric of the Mercians and of Lindsey,<a href="#note_545" id="noteref_545" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">545</span></span></a> took
          care to administer it with great perfection of life, according to
          the example of the ancient fathers. King Wulfhere also gave him
          land of the extent of fifty families, to build a monastery, at the
          place called Ad Barvae,<a href="#note_546" id="noteref_546" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">546</span></span></a> or
          <span class="tei tei-q">“At the Wood,”</span> in the province of
          Lindsey, wherein traces of the monastic life instituted by him
          continue to this day.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He had his
          episcopal see in the place called Lyccidfelth,<a href="#note_547" id="noteref_547" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">547</span></span></a> in
          which he also died, and was buried, and where the see of the
          succeeding bishops of that province continues to this day. He had
          built himself a retired habitation not far from the church, wherein
          he was wont to pray and read in private, with a few, it might be
          seven or eight of the brethren, as often as he had any spare
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page220">[pg 220]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg220"/> time from the labour
          and ministry of the Word. When he had most gloriously governed the
          church in that province for two years and a half, the Divine
          Providence so ordaining, there came round a season like that of
          which Ecclesiastes says, <span class="tei tei-q">“That there is a
          time to cast away stones, and a time to gather stones
          together;”</span><a href="#note_548" id="noteref_548" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">548</span></span></a> for a
          plague fell upon them, sent from Heaven, which, by means of the
          death of the flesh, translated the living stones of the Church from
          their earthly places to the heavenly building. And when, after many
          of the Church of that most reverend prelate had been taken away out
          of the flesh, his hour also drew near wherein he was to pass out of
          this world to the Lord, it happened one day that he was in the
          aforesaid habitation with only one brother, called Owini,<a href="#note_549" id="noteref_549" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">549</span></span></a> his
          other companions having upon some due occasion returned to the
          church. Now Owini was a monk of great merit, having forsaken the
          world with the sole desire of the heavenly reward; worthy in all
          respects to have the secrets of the Lord revealed to him in special
          wise, and worthy to have credit given by his hearers to what he
          said. For he had come with Queen Ethelthryth<a href="#note_550" id="noteref_550" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">550</span></span></a> from
          the province of the East Angles, and was the chief of her thegns,
          and governor of her house. As the fervour of his faith increased,
          resolving to renounce the secular life, he did not go about it
          slothfully, but so entirely forsook the things of this world, that,
          quitting all that he had, clad in a plain garment, and carrying an
          axe and hatchet in his hand, he came to the monastery of the same
          most reverend father, which is called Laestingaeu. He said that he
          was not entering the monastery in order to live in idleness, as
          some do, but to labour; which he also confirmed by practice; for as
          he was less capable of studying the Scriptures, the more earnestly
          he applied himself to <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page221">[pg
          221]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg221"/>
          the labour of his hands. So then, forasmuch as he was reverent and
          devout, he was kept by the bishop in the aforesaid habitation with
          the brethren, and whilst they were engaged within in reading, he
          was without, doing such things as were necessary.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">One day, when he
          was thus employed abroad, his companions having gone to the church,
          as I began to tell, and the bishop was alone reading or praying in
          the oratory of that place, on a sudden, as he afterwards said, he
          heard a sweet sound of singing and rejoicing descend from heaven to
          earth. This sound he said he first heard coming from the sky in the
          south-east, above the winter sunrise, and that afterwards it drew
          near him gradually, till it came to the roof of the oratory where
          the bishop was, and entering therein, filled all the place and
          encompassed it about. He listened attentively to what he heard, and
          after about half an hour, perceived the same song of joy to ascend
          from the roof of the said oratory, and to return to heaven in the
          same way as it came, with unspeakable sweetness. When he had stood
          some time amazed, and earnestly considering in his mind what this
          might be, the bishop opened the window of the oratory, and making a
          sound with his hand, as he was often wont to do, bade anyone who
          might be without to come in to him. He went hastily in, and the
          bishop said to him, <span class="tei tei-q">“Make haste to the
          church, and cause those seven brothers to come hither, and do you
          come with them.”</span> When they were come, he first admonished
          them to preserve the virtue of love and peace among themselves, and
          towards all the faithful; and with unwearied earnestness to follow
          the rules of monastic discipline, which they had either been taught
          by him, and had seen him observe, or had found in the words and
          actions of the former fathers. Then he added that the day of his
          death was at hand; for, said he, <span class="tei tei-q">“that
          gracious guest, who was wont to visit our brethren, has vouchsafed
          also to come to me this day, and to call me out of this world.
          Return, therefore, to the church, and speak to the brethren, that
          in their prayers they commend my departure to the Lord, and that
          they be <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page222">[pg
          222]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg222"/>
          mindful to prepare for their own, the hour whereof is uncertain, by
          watching, and prayer, and good works.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">When he had
          spoken thus much and more to the same end, and they, having
          received his blessing, had gone away in great sorrow, he who had
          heard the heavenly song returned alone, and prostrating himself on
          the ground, said, <span class="tei tei-q">“I beseech you, father,
          may I be permitted to ask a question?”</span>—<span class="tei tei-q">“Ask what you will,”</span> answered the bishop. Then
          he said, <span class="tei tei-q">“I beseech you to tell me what was
          that song which I heard as of a joyful company coming from heaven
          upon this oratory, and after some time returning to heaven?”</span>
          The bishop answered: <span class="tei tei-q">“If you heard the
          singing, and know of the coming of the heavenly company, I command
          you, in the Name of the Lord, that you tell it not to any before my
          death. But in truth they were angelic spirits, who came to call me
          to my heavenly reward, which I have always loved and longed after,
          and they promised that they would return seven days hence, and take
          me away with them.”</span> Which was indeed fulfilled, as had been
          said to him; for being presently seized with bodily infirmity, and
          the same daily increasing, on the seventh day, as had been promised
          to him, when he had prepared for death by receiving the Body and
          Blood of our Lord, his saintly soul being delivered from the prison
          of the body, led, as may justly be believed, by the attendant
          angels, he departed to the joys of Heaven.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">It is no wonder
          that he joyfully beheld the day of his death, or rather the day of
          the Lord, the coming whereof he had always been mindful to await
          with earnest expectation. For with all his merits of continence,
          humility, teaching, prayer, voluntary poverty, and other virtues,
          he was so filled with the fear of the Lord, so mindful of his
          latter end in all his actions, that, as I was wont to hear from one
          of the brothers who instructed me in the Scriptures, and who had
          been bred in his monastery, and under his direction, whose name was
          Trumbert, if it happened that there blew a sudden strong gust of
          wind, when he was reading or doing any other thing, he forthwith
          called upon the Lord for mercy, and begged <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page223">[pg 223]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg223"/> that it might be granted to all mankind. If
          the wind grew stronger, he closed his book, and fell on his face,
          praying still more earnestly. But, if a violent storm of wind or
          rain came on, or if the earth and air were filled with the terror
          of thunder and lightning, he would go to the church, and anxiously
          devote himself with all his heart to prayers and psalms till the
          weather became calm. Being asked by his brethren why he did so, he
          answered, <span class="tei tei-q">“Have not you read—<span class="tei tei-q">‘The Lord also thundered in the heavens, and the
          Highest gave his voice. Yea, he sent out his arrows and scattered
          them; and he shot out lightnings, and discomfited
          them.’</span><a href="#note_551" id="noteref_551" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">551</span></span></a> For
          the Lord moves the air, raises the winds, hurls lightning, and
          thunders from heaven, to rouse the inhabitants of the earth to fear
          him; to put them in mind of judgement to come; to dispel their
          pride, and confound their boldness, by recalling to their thoughts
          that dread time, when the heavens and the earth being on fire, He
          will come in the clouds, with great power and majesty, to judge the
          quick and the dead. Wherefore,”</span> said he, <span class="tei tei-q">“it behoves us to respond to His heavenly admonition
          with due fear and love; that, as often as the air is moved and He
          puts forth His hand threatening to strike, but does not yet let it
          fall, we may immediately implore His mercy; and searching the
          recesses of our hearts, and casting out the dregs of our sins, we
          may carefully so act that we may never deserve to be struck
          down.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">With this
          revelation and narrative of the aforesaid brother, concerning the
          death of this prelate, agrees the account of the most reverend
          Father Egbert, above spoken of,<a href="#note_552" id="noteref_552" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">552</span></span></a> who
          long and zealously led a monastic life with the same Ceadda, when
          both were youths, in Ireland, in prayer and self-denial and
          meditation on the Holy Scriptures. But whereas Ceadda afterwards
          returned into his own country, Egbert continued to live abroad for
          the Lord's sake till the end of his life. A long time after,
          Hygbald, a man of great holiness and continence, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page224">[pg 224]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg224"/> who was an abbot in the province of
          Lindsey,<a href="#note_553" id="noteref_553" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">553</span></span></a> came
          from Britain to visit him, and whilst, as became holy men, they
          were discoursing of the life of the former fathers, and rejoicing
          to imitate the same, mention was made of the most reverend prelate,
          Ceadda; whereupon Egbert said, <span class="tei tei-q">“I know a
          man in this island, still in the flesh, who, when Ceadda passed
          away from this world, saw the soul of his brother Cedd, with a
          company of angels, descending from heaven, who, having taken
          Ceadda's soul along with them, returned again to the heavenly
          kingdom.”</span> Whether he said this of himself, or some other, we
          do not certainly know; but because it was said by so great a man,
          there can be no doubt of the truth thereof.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Ceadda died on
          the 2nd of March,<a href="#note_554" id="noteref_554" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">554</span></span></a> and
          was first buried by St. Mary's Church, but afterwards, when the
          church of the most blessed chief of the Apostles, Peter, was built
          in the same place, his bones were translated into it. In both which
          places, as a testimony of his virtue, frequent miracles of healing
          are wont to be wrought. And of late, a certain man that had a
          frenzy, wandering about everywhere, arrived there in the evening,
          unperceived or disregarded by the keepers of the place, and having
          rested there the whole of the night, came forth in his right mind
          the next morning, to the surprise and joy of all, and told what a
          cure had been wrought on him through the goodness of God. The place
          of the sepulchre is a wooden monument, made like a little house,
          covered, having a hole in the wall, through which those that go
          thither for devotion are wont to put in their hand and take out
          some of the dust. This they put into water and give to sick cattle
          or men to drink, whereupon they are presently eased of their
          infirmity, and restored to their desired health.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In his place,
          Theodore ordained Wynfrid,<a href="#note_555" id="noteref_555" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">555</span></span></a> a man
          of <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page225">[pg 225]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg225"/> good and sober life,
          to preside, like his predecessors, over the bishoprics of the
          Mercians, the Midland Angles, and Lindsey, of all which, Wulfhere,
          who was still living, was king. Wynfrid was one of the clergy of
          the prelate he succeeded, and had for no small time filled the
          office of deacon under him.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc193"/> <a id="pdf194"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_IV_Chap_IV"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. IV. How Bishop Colman, having
          left Britain, built two monasteries in the country of the Scots;
          the one for the Scots, the other for the English whom he had taken
          along with him. [667</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the meantime,
          Colman, the Scottish bishop, departing from Britain,<a href="#note_556" id="noteref_556" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">556</span></span></a> took
          along with him all the Scots whom he had gathered about him in the
          isle of Lindisfarne, and also about thirty of the English nation,
          for both these companies had been trained in duties of the monastic
          life; and leaving some brothers in his church, he went first to the
          isle of Hii,<a href="#note_557" id="noteref_557" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">557</span></span></a>
          whence he had been sent to preach the Word of God to the English
          nation. Afterwards he retired to a small island, which is to the
          west of Ireland, and at some distance from it, called in the
          language of the Scots, Inisboufinde,<a href="#note_558" id="noteref_558" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">558</span></span></a> the
          Island of the White Heifer. Arriving there, he built a monastery,
          and placed in it the monks he had brought of both nations. But they
          could not agree among themselves, by reason that the Scots, in the
          summer season, when the harvest was to be brought in, leaving the
          monastery, wandered about through places known to them; but
          returned again the next winter, and desired to use in common what
          the English had provided. Colman sought to put an end to this
          dissension, and travelling about far and near, he found a place in
          the island of Ireland fitted to be the site of a monastery, which,
          in the language of the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page226">[pg
          226]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg226"/>
          Scots, is called Mageo.<a href="#note_559" id="noteref_559" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">559</span></span></a> He
          bought a small part of it of the chief to whom it belonged, to
          build his monastery thereon; upon condition, that the monks
          dwelling there should pray to the Lord for him who let them have
          the place. Then at once building a monastery, with the assistance
          of the chief and all the neighbouring people, he placed the English
          there, leaving the Scots in the aforesaid island. This monastery is
          to this day occupied by English inhabitants; being the same that,
          grown from a small beginning to be very large, is commonly called
          Muigeo; and as all have long since been brought to adopt better
          customs, it contains a notable society of monks, who are gathered
          there from the province of the English, and live by the labour of
          their own hands, after the example of the venerable fathers, under
          a rule and a canonical abbot, in much continence and singleness of
          life.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc195"/> <a id="pdf196"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_IV_Chap_V"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. V. Of the death of the kings
          Oswy and Egbert, and of the synod held at the place
          Herutford,</span><a href="#note_560" id="noteref_560" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">560</span></span></a>
<span style="font-size: 144%">in which Archbishop Theodore
          presided. [670-673</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year of
          our Lord 670,<a href="#note_561" id="noteref_561" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">561</span></span></a> being
          the second year after Theodore arrived in England, Oswy, king of
          the Northumbrians, fell sick, and died, in the fifty-eighth year of
          his age.<a href="#note_562" id="noteref_562" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">562</span></span></a> He at
          that time bore so great affection to the Roman Apostolic usages,
          that he had designed, if he recovered from his sickness, to go to
          Rome, and there <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page227">[pg
          227]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg227"/>
          to end his days at the holy places, having asked Bishop Wilfrid,
          with a promise of no small gift of money, to conduct him on his
          journey. He died on the 15th of February, leaving his son
          Egfrid<a href="#note_563" id="noteref_563" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">563</span></span></a> his
          successor in the kingdom. In the third year of his reign, Theodore
          assembled a council of bishops, along with many other teachers of
          the church, who loved and were acquainted with the canonical
          statutes of the fathers. When they were met together, he began, in
          the spirit which became a bishop, to enjoin the observance of such
          things as were in accordance with the unity and the peace of the
          Church. The purport of the proceedings of this synod is as
          follows:—<a href="#note_564" id="noteref_564" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">564</span></span></a></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“In the name of our Lord God and Saviour Jesus Christ,
          Who reigns for ever and governs His Church, it was thought meet
          that we should assemble, according to the custom prescribed in the
          venerable canons, to treat about the necessary affairs of the
          Church. We met on the 24th day of September, the first
          indiction,<a href="#note_565" id="noteref_565" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">565</span></span></a> at
          the place which is called Herutford: I, Theodore, albeit unworthy,
          appointed by the Apostolic see bishop of the church of Canterbury;
          our fellow priest and brother, the most reverend Bisi, bishop of
          the East Angles; and with <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page228">[pg
          228]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg228"/>
          us also our brother and fellow priest, Wilfrid, bishop of the
          nation of the Northumbrians, represented by his proxies. There were
          present also our brothers and fellow priests, Putta, bishop of the
          Kentish castle, called Rochester; Leutherius, bishop of the West
          Saxons, and Wynfrid, bishop of the province of the Mercians.<a href="#note_566" id="noteref_566" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">566</span></span></a> When
          we were all met together, and had sat down in order, I said,
          <span class="tei tei-q">‘I beseech you, most dear brothers, for the
          fear and love of our Redeemer, that we may all treat in common on
          behalf of our faith; to the end that whatsoever has been decreed
          and defined by holy and approved fathers, may be inviolably
          observed by all of us.’</span> This and much more I spoke tending
          to charity and the preservation of the unity of the Church; and
          when I had ended my preface, I asked every one of them in order,
          whether they consented to observe the things that had been of old
          canonically decreed by the fathers? To which all our fellow priests
          answered, <span class="tei tei-q">‘Most assuredly we are all
          resolved to observe willingly and heartily whatsoever is laid down
          in the canons of the holy fathers.’</span> Then forthwith I
          produced the said book of canons,<a href="#note_567" id="noteref_567" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">567</span></span></a> and
          in the presence of them all showed ten articles in the same, which
          I had marked in several places, because I knew them to be of the
          most importance to us, and entreated that these might be most
          particularly received by them all.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Article I. That we all in common keep the holy day of
          Easter on the Sunday after the fourteenth moon of the first
          month.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“II. That no bishop intrude into the diocese of
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page229">[pg 229]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg229"/> another, but be
          satisfied with the government of the people committed to
          him.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“III. That it shall not be lawful for any bishop to
          disturb in any matter monasteries dedicated to God, nor to take
          away forcibly any part of their property.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“IV. That the monks themselves do not move from one
          place to another, that is, from monastery to monastery, unless with
          the consent of their own abbot; but that they continue in the
          obedience which they promised at the time of their
          conversion.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“V. That no clerk, forsaking his own bishop, shall
          wander about, or be anywhere received without commendatory letters
          from his diocesan. But if he shall be once received, and will not
          return when summoned, both the receiver, and he that is received
          shall be under excommunication.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“VI. That bishops and clergy, when travelling, shall be
          content with the hospitality that is afforded them; and that it be
          not lawful for any one of them to exercise any priestly function
          without leave of the bishop in whose diocese he is known to
          be.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“VII. That a synod be assembled twice a year; but on
          account of divers hindrances, it was approved by all, that we
          should meet once a year, on the 1st of August, at the place called
          Clofeshoch.<a href="#note_568" id="noteref_568" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">568</span></span></a></span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“VIII. That no bishop, through ambition, shall set
          himself above another; but that they shall all observe the time and
          order of their consecration.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“IX. The ninth Article was discussed in common, to the
          effect that more bishops should be made, as the number of the
          faithful increased; but this matter for the present was passed
          over.<a href="#note_569" id="noteref_569" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">569</span></span></a></span></p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page230">[pg 230]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg230"/>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“X. Of marriages; that nothing be allowed but lawful
          wedlock; that none commit incest; no man leave his own wife, except
          it be, as the holy Gospel teaches, for fornication. And if any man
          shall put away his own wife, lawfully joined to him in matrimony,
          that he take no other, if he wishes to be a true Christian, but
          continue as he is, or else be reconciled to his own
          wife.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“These articles being thus discussed and defined in
          common, to the end, that for the future, no stumbling-block of
          contention might arise from any one of us, or that things be
          falsely set forth, it was thought fit that every one of us should,
          by the subscription of his own hand, confirm all the particulars so
          defined. Which judgement, as defined by us, I dictated to be
          written by Titillus our notary. Given in the month and indiction
          aforesaid. Whosoever, therefore, shall attempt in any way to oppose
          or infringe this decision, confirmed by our consent, and by the
          subscription of our hands, according to the decree of the canons,
          must know, that he is excluded from all sacerdotal functions, and
          from our fellowship. May the Grace of God keep us in safety, living
          in the unity of His Holy Church.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">This synod was
          held in the year of our Lord 673. In which year Egbert, king of
          Kent,<a href="#note_570" id="noteref_570" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">570</span></span></a> died
          in the month of July; his brother Hlothere<a href="#note_571" id="noteref_571" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">571</span></span></a>
          succeeded him on the throne, which he held eleven years and seven
          months. Bisi, the bishop of the East Angles, who is said to have
          been in the aforesaid synod, a man of great saintliness and piety,
          was successor to Boniface,<a href="#note_572" id="noteref_572" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">572</span></span></a>
          before spoken of; for when Boniface died, after having been bishop
          seventeen years, he was ordained by Theodore and made bishop in his
          place. Whilst he was still alive, but hindered by grievous
          infirmity from administering his episcopal functions, two
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page231">[pg 231]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg231"/> bishops, Aecci and
          Badwin, were elected and consecrated in his place; from which time
          to the present, that province has had two bishops.<a href="#note_573" id="noteref_573" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">573</span></span></a></p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc197"/> <a id="pdf198"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_IV_Chap_VI"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. VI. How Wynfrid being deposed,
          Sexwulf received his bishopric, and Earconwald was made bishop of
          the East Saxons. [675</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Not long after
          these events, Theodore, the archbishop, taking offence at some act
          of disobedience of Wynfrid, bishop of the Mercians,<a href="#note_574" id="noteref_574" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">574</span></span></a>
          deposed him from his bishopric when he had held it but a few years,
          and in his place ordained Sexwulf bishop,<a href="#note_575" id="noteref_575" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">575</span></span></a> who
          was founder and abbot of the monastery which is called
          Medeshamstead,<a href="#note_576" id="noteref_576" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">576</span></span></a> in
          the country of the Gyrwas.<a href="#note_577" id="noteref_577" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">577</span></span></a>
          Wynfrid, thus deposed, returned to his monastery which is called Ad
          Barvae,<a href="#note_578" id="noteref_578" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">578</span></span></a> and
          there ended his life in holy conversation.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Theodore then
          also appointed Earconwald,<a href="#note_579" id="noteref_579" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">579</span></span></a>
          bishop of <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page232">[pg
          232]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg232"/>
          the East Saxons, in the city of London, over whom at that time
          reigned Sebbi and Sighere, of whom mention has been made
          above.<a href="#note_580" id="noteref_580" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">580</span></span></a> This
          Earconwald's life and conversation, as well when he was bishop as
          before that time, is said to have been most holy, as is even now
          testified by heavenly miracles; for to this day, his horse-litter,
          in which he was wont to be carried when sick, is kept by his
          disciples, and continues to cure many of fevers and other ailments;
          and not only sick persons who are laid under that litter, or close
          by it, are cured; but the very splinters cut from it, when carried
          to the sick, are wont immediately to bring healing to them.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">This man, before
          he was made bishop, had built two famous monasteries, the one for
          himself, and the other for his sister Ethelburg,<a href="#note_581" id="noteref_581" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">581</span></span></a> and
          established them both in regular discipline of the best kind. That
          for himself was in the district of Sudergeona, by the river Thames,
          at a place called Cerotaesei,<a href="#note_582" id="noteref_582" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">582</span></span></a> that
          is, the Island of Cerot; that for his sister in the province of the
          East Saxons, at a place called In Berecingum,<a href="#note_583" id="noteref_583" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">583</span></span></a>
          wherein she might be a mother and nurse of women devoted to God.
          Being put into the government of that monastery, she showed herself
          in all respects worthy of her brother the bishop, by her own holy
          life and by her regular and pious care of those under her rule, as
          was also manifested by heavenly miracles.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc199"/> <a id="pdf200"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_IV_Chap_VII"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. VII. How it was indicated by a
          light from heaven where the bodies of the nuns should be buried in
          the monastery of Berecingum. [675</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">?]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In this
          monastery many miracles were wrought, accounts of which have been
          committed to writing by those who <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page233">[pg 233]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg233"/> were acquainted with them, that their memory
          might be preserved, and succeeding generations edified, and these
          are in the possession of many persons; some of them we also have
          taken pains to include in our History of the Church. At the time of
          the pestilence, already often mentioned,<a href="#note_584" id="noteref_584" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">584</span></span></a> which
          ravaged all the country far and wide, it had also seized on that
          part of this monastery where the men abode, and they were daily
          hurried away to the Lord. The careful mother of the community began
          often to inquire of the sisters, when they were gathered together;
          in what part of the monastery they desired to be buried and a
          cemetery to be made, when the same affliction should fall upon that
          part of the monastery in which the handmaids of the Lord dwelt
          together apart from the men, and they should be snatched away out
          of this world by the same destruction as the rest. Receiving no
          certain answer from the sisters, though she often questioned them,
          she and all of them received a most certain answer from the Divine
          Providence. For one night, after matins had been sung, and those
          handmaids of Christ had gone out of their chapel to the tombs of
          the brothers who had departed this life before them, and were
          singing the customary songs of praise to the Lord, on a sudden a
          light from heaven, like a great sheet, came down upon them all, and
          struck them with such amazement, that, in consternation, they even
          left off singing their hymn. But that resplendent light, in
          comparison wherewith the sun at noon-day might seem dark, soon
          after, rising from that place, removed to the south side of the
          monastery, that is, to the westward of the chapel, and having
          continued there some time, and rested upon those parts, in the
          sight of them all withdrew itself again to heaven, leaving no doubt
          in the minds of all, but that the same light, which was to lead or
          to receive the souls of those handmaids of Christ into Heaven, also
          showed the place in which their bodies were to rest and await the
          day of the resurrection. The radiance of this light was so great,
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page234">[pg 234]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg234"/> that one of the
          older brethren, who at the same time was in their chapel with
          another younger than himself, related in the morning, that the rays
          of light which came in at the crannies of the doors and windows,
          seemed to exceed the utmost brightness of daylight.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc201"/> <a id="pdf202"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_IV_Chap_VIII"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. VIII. How a little boy, dying
          in the same monastery, called upon a virgin that was to follow him;
          and how another nun, at the point of leaving her body, saw some
          small part of the future glory. [675</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">?]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">There was, in
          the same monastery, a boy, not above three years old, called
          Aesica; who, by reason of his tender age, was being brought up
          among the virgins dedicated to God, there to learn his lessons.
          This child being seized by the aforesaid pestilence, when his last
          hour was come, called three times upon one of the virgins
          consecrated to Christ, speaking to her by her own name, as if she
          had been present, Eadgyth! Eadgyth! Eadgyth! and thus ending his
          temporal life, entered into that which is eternal. The virgin, to
          whom he called, as he was dying, was immediately seized, where she
          was, with the same sickness, and departing this life the same day
          on which she had been summoned, followed him that called her into
          the heavenly kingdom.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Likewise, one of
          the same handmaids of God, being smitten with the same disease, and
          reduced to the last extremity, began on a sudden, about midnight,
          to cry out to them that ministered to her, desiring they would put
          out the lamp that was lighted there. And, when she had done this
          many times, and yet no one did her will, at last she said,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“I know that you think I am raving, when I
          say this, but be assured that it is not so; for I tell you truly,
          that I see this house filled with so great a light, that that lamp
          of yours seems to me to be altogether dark.”</span> And when still
          no one replied to what she said, or did her bidding, she added,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Burn your lamp, then, as long as you will;
          but know, that it is not my light, for my light will come to me at
          the dawn of day.”</span> Then <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page235">[pg 235]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg235"/> she began to tell, that a certain man of God,
          who had died that same year, had appeared to her, telling her that
          at the break of day she should depart to the eternal light. The
          truth of which vision was speedily proved by the maiden's death as
          soon as the day appeared.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc203"/> <a id="pdf204"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. IX. Of the signs which were
          shown from Heaven when the mother of that community departed this
          life. [675</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">?]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Now when
          Ethelburg herself, the pious mother of that community devoted to
          God, was about to be taken out of this world, a wonderful vision
          appeared to one of the sisters, called Tortgyth; who, having lived
          many years in that monastery, always endeavoured, in all humility
          and sincerity, to serve God herself, and to help the mother to
          maintain regular discipline, by instructing and reproving the
          younger ones. Now, in order that her virtue might, according to the
          Apostle, be made perfect in weakness, she was suddenly seized with
          a most grievous bodily disease, under which, through the merciful
          providence of our Redeemer, she was sorely tried for the space of
          nine years; to the end, that whatever stain of evil remained amidst
          her virtues, either through ignorance or neglect, might all be
          purified in the furnace of long tribulation. This woman, going out
          of the chamber where she abode one night, at dusk, plainly saw as
          it were a human body, which was brighter than the sun, wrapped in
          fine linen, and lifted up on high, being taken out of the house in
          which the sisters used to sleep. Then looking earnestly to see what
          it was that drew up that appearance of the glorious body which she
          beheld, she perceived that it was raised on high as it were by
          cords brighter than gold, until, entering into the open heavens, it
          could no longer be seen by her. Reflecting on this vision, she made
          no doubt that some one of the community would soon die, and her
          soul be lifted up to heaven by the good works which she had
          wrought, as it were by golden cords. And so in truth it befell; for
          a <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page236">[pg 236]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg236"/> few days after, the
          beloved of God, Ethelburg, mother of that community, was delivered
          out of the prison of the flesh; and her life is proved to have been
          such that no one who knew her ought to doubt that an entrance into
          the heavenly country was open to her, when she departed from this
          life.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">There was also,
          in the same monastery, a certain nun, of noble origin in this
          world, and still nobler in the love of the world to come; who had,
          for many years, been so disabled in all her body, that she could
          not move a single limb. When she heard that the body of the
          venerable abbess had been carried into the church, till it should
          be buried, she desired to be carried thither, and to be placed
          bending towards it, after the manner of one praying; which being
          done, she spoke to her as if she had been living, and entreated her
          that she would obtain of the mercy of our pitiful Creator, that she
          might be delivered from such great and long-continued pains; nor
          was it long before her prayer was heard: for being delivered from
          the flesh twelve days after, she exchanged her temporal afflictions
          for an eternal reward.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">For three years
          after the death of her Superior, the aforesaid handmaid of Christ,
          Tortgyth, was detained in this life and was so far spent with the
          sickness before mentioned, that her bones scarce held together. At
          last, when the time of her release was at hand, she not only lost
          the use of her other limbs, but also of her tongue; in which state
          having continued three days and as many nights, she was, on a
          sudden, restored by a spiritual vision, and opened her lips and
          eyes, and looking up to heaven, began thus to speak to the vision
          which she saw: <span class="tei tei-q">“Very acceptable to me is
          thy coming, and thou art welcome!”</span> Having so said, she was
          silent awhile, as it were, waiting for the answer of him whom she
          saw and to whom she spoke; then, as if somewhat displeased, she
          said, <span class="tei tei-q">“I can in no wise gladly suffer
          this;”</span> then pausing awhile, she said again, <span class="tei tei-q">“If it can by no means be to-day, I beg that the delay
          may not be long;”</span> and again holding her peace a short while,
          she concluded thus; <span class="tei tei-q">“If it is certainly so
          determined, and <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page237">[pg
          237]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg237"/>
          the decree cannot be altered, I beg that it may be no longer
          deferred than this next night.”</span> Having so said, and being
          asked by those about her with whom she talked, she said,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“With my most dear mother,
          Ethelburg;”</span> by which they understood, that she was come to
          acquaint her that the time of her departure was at hand; for, as
          she had desired, after one day and night, she was delivered alike
          from the bonds of the flesh and of her infirmity and entered into
          the joys of eternal salvation.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc205"/> <a id="pdf206"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_IV_Chap_X"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. X. How a blind woman, praying
          in the burial-place of that monastery, was restored to her sight.
          [675</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">?]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Hildilid, a
          devout handmaid of God, succeeded Ethelburg in the office of abbess
          and presided over that monastery with great vigour many years, till
          she was of an extreme old age,<a href="#note_585" id="noteref_585" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">585</span></span></a> in
          the observance of regular discipline, and carefully providing all
          things for the common use. The narrowness of the space where the
          monastery is built, led her to determine that the bones of the
          servants and handmaidens of Christ, who had been there buried,
          should be taken up, and should all be translated into the church of
          the Blessed Mother of God, and interred in one place. How often a
          brightness of heavenly light was seen there, when this was done,
          and a fragrancy of wonderful sweetness arose, and what other signs
          were revealed, whosoever reads will find in the book from which we
          have taken these tales.<a href="#note_586" id="noteref_586" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">586</span></span></a></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But in truth, I
          think it by no means fit to pass over <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page238">[pg 238]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg238"/> the miracle of healing, which the same book
          informs us was wrought in the cemetery of that community dedicated
          to God. There lived in that neighbourhood a certain thegn, whose
          wife was seized with a sudden dimness in her eyes, and as the
          malady increased daily, it became so burdensome to her, that she
          could not see the least glimpse of light. Having continued some
          time wrapped in the night of this blindness, on a sudden she
          bethought herself that she might recover her lost sight, if she
          were carried to the monastery of the nuns, and there prayed at the
          relics of the saints. Nor did she lose any time in fulfilling that
          which she had conceived in her mind: for being conducted by her
          maids to the monastery, which was very near, and professing that
          she had perfect faith that she should be there healed, she was led
          into the cemetery, and having long prayed there on her knees, she
          did not fail to be heard, for as she rose from prayer, before she
          went out of the place, she received the gift of sight which she had
          desired; and whereas she had been led thither by the hands of her
          maids, she now returned home joyfully without help: as if she had
          lost the light of this world to no other end than that she might
          show by her recovery how great a light is vouchsafed to the saints
          of Christ in Heaven, and how great a grace of healing power.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc207"/> <a id="pdf208"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_IV_Chap_XI"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XI. How Sebbi, king of the same
          province, ended his life in a monastery. [694</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At that time, as
          the same little book informs us, Sebbi,<a href="#note_587" id="noteref_587" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">587</span></span></a> a
          very devout man, of whom mention has been made above, governed the
          kingdom of the East Saxons. His mind was set on religious acts,
          frequent prayer and pious fruits of almsgiving; he esteemed a
          private and monastic life better than all the wealth and honours of
          his kingdom, and he would have long before left his kingdom and
          adopted that life, had not his wife firmly refused to <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page239">[pg 239]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg239"/> be divorced from him; for which reason
          many were of opinion and often said that a man of such a
          disposition ought rather to have been made a bishop than a king.
          When he had spent thirty years as a king and a soldier of the
          heavenly kingdom, he fell into great bodily infirmity, of which he
          afterwards died, and he admonished his wife, that they should then
          at least together devote themselves to the service of God, since
          they could no longer together enjoy, or rather serve, the world.
          Having with much difficulty obtained this of her, he went to
          Waldhere, bishop of London, who had succeeded Earconwald,<a href="#note_588" id="noteref_588" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">588</span></span></a> and
          with his blessing received the religious habit, which he had long
          desired. He also carried to him a considerable sum of money, to be
          given to the poor, reserving nothing to himself, but rather
          coveting to remain poor in spirit for the sake of the kingdom of
          Heaven.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">When the
          aforesaid sickness increased, and he perceived the day of his death
          to be drawing near, being a man of a royal disposition, he began to
          apprehend lest, when in great pain, at the approach of death, he
          might commit anything unworthy of his character, either by word or
          gesture. Wherefore, calling to him the aforesaid bishop of London,
          in which city he then was, he entreated him that none might be
          present at his death, besides the bishop himself, and two of his
          own attendants. The bishop having promised that he would most
          willingly grant his request, not long after the man of God composed
          himself to sleep, and saw a consoling vision, which took from him
          all anxiety concerning the aforesaid uneasiness; and, moreover,
          showed him on what day he was to end his life. For, as he
          afterwards related, he saw three men in shining garments come to
          him; one of whom sat down by his bed, whilst his companions who had
          come with him stood and inquired <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page240">[pg 240]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg240"/> about the state of the sick man they had come
          to visit, and he said that the king's soul should quit his body
          without any pain, and with a great splendour of light; and told him
          that he should die the third day after. Both these things came to
          pass, as he had learnt from the vision; for on the third day after,
          at the ninth hour, he suddenly fell, as it were, into a light
          slumber, and without any sense of pain he gave up the ghost.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">A stone coffin
          had been prepared for his burial, but when they came to lay him in
          it, they found his body a span longer than the coffin. Hereupon
          they chipped away as much of the stone as they could, and made the
          coffin about two inches longer; but not even so would it contain
          the body. Wherefore because of this difficulty of entombing him,
          they had thoughts either to get another coffin, or else to shorten
          the body, by bending it at the knees, if they could, so that the
          coffin might contain it. But Heaven interposed and a miracle
          prevented the execution of either of those designs; for on a
          sudden, in the presence of the bishop and Sighard, who was the son
          of that same king and monk, and who reigned after him jointly with
          his brother Suefred,<a href="#note_589" id="noteref_589" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">589</span></span></a> and
          of no small number of men, that coffin was found to fit the length
          of the body, insomuch that a pillow might even be put in at the
          head; and at the feet the coffin was four inches longer than the
          body. He was buried in the church of the blessed teacher of the
          Gentiles,<a href="#note_590" id="noteref_590" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">590</span></span></a> by
          whose doctrine he had learned to hope for heavenly things.</p>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page241">[pg 241]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg241"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc209"/> <a id="pdf210"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_IV_Chap_XII"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XII. How Haedde succeeded
          Leutherius in the bishopric of the West Saxons; how Cuichelm
          succeeded Putta in the bishopric of the church of Rochester, and
          was himself succeeded by Gebmund; and who were then bishops of the
          Northumbrians. [673-681</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Leutherius was
          the fourth bishop of the West Saxons; for Birinus was the first,
          Agilbert the second, and Wini the third.<a href="#note_591" id="noteref_591" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">591</span></span></a> When
          Coinwalch,<a href="#note_592" id="noteref_592" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">592</span></span></a> in
          whose reign the said Leutherius was made bishop, died, the
          sub-kings took upon them the government of the nation, and dividing
          it among themselves, held it for about ten years; and during their
          rule he died, and Haedde<a href="#note_593" id="noteref_593" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">593</span></span></a>
          succeeded him in the bishopric, having been consecrated by
          Theodore, in the city of London. During his episcopate,
          Caedwalla,<a href="#note_594" id="noteref_594" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">594</span></span></a>
          having subdued and removed the sub-kings, took upon himself the
          supreme authority. When he had held it for two years, and whilst
          the same bishop still governed the church, at length impelled by
          love of the heavenly kingdom, he quitted it and, going away to
          Rome, ended his days there, as shall be said more fully
          hereafter.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year of
          our Lord 676, when Ethelred, king of the Mercians,<a href="#note_595" id="noteref_595" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">595</span></span></a>
          ravaged Kent with a hostile army, and <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page242">[pg 242]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg242"/> profaned churches and monasteries, without
          regard to pity, or the fear of God, in the general destruction he
          laid waste the city of Rochester; Putta,<a href="#note_596" id="noteref_596" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">596</span></span></a> who
          was bishop, was absent at that time, but when he understood that
          his church was ravaged, and everything taken away from it, he went
          to Sexwulf, bishop of the Mercians,<a href="#note_597" id="noteref_597" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">597</span></span></a> and
          having received of him a certain church, and a small piece of land,
          ended his days there in peace; in no way endeavouring to restore
          his bishopric, for, as has been said above, he was more industrious
          in ecclesiastical than in worldly affairs; serving God only in that
          church, and going wherever he was desired, to teach Church music.
          Theodore consecrated Cuichelm bishop of Rochester in his stead; but
          he, not long after, departing from his bishopric for want of
          necessaries, and withdrawing to other parts, Gebmund was put in his
          place by Theodore.<a href="#note_598" id="noteref_598" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">598</span></span></a></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year of
          our Lord 678, which is the eighth of the reign of Egfrid, in the
          month of August, appeared a star, called a comet, which continued
          for three months, rising in the morning, and sending forth, as it
          were, a tall pillar of radiant flame. The same year a dissension
          broke out between King Egfrid and the most reverend prelate,
          Wilfrid, who was driven from his see,<a href="#note_599" id="noteref_599" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">599</span></span></a> and
          two bishops substituted for him, to preside over the nation
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page243">[pg 243]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg243"/> of the
          Northumbrians,<a href="#note_600" id="noteref_600" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">600</span></span></a>
          namely, Bosa,<a href="#note_601" id="noteref_601" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">601</span></span></a> to
          govern the province of the Deiri; and Eata<a href="#note_602" id="noteref_602" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">602</span></span></a> that
          of the Bernicians; the former having his episcopal see in the city
          of York, the latter either in the church of Hagustald, or of
          Lindisfarne; both of them promoted to the episcopal dignity from a
          community of monks. With them also Eadhaed<a href="#note_603" id="noteref_603" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">603</span></span></a> was
          ordained bishop for the province of Lindsey, which King Egfrid had
          but newly acquired, having defeated Wulfhere and put him to
          flight;<a href="#note_604" id="noteref_604" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">604</span></span></a> and
          this was the first bishop of its own which that province had; the
          second was Ethelwin;<a href="#note_605" id="noteref_605" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">605</span></span></a> the
          third Edgar;<a href="#note_606" id="noteref_606" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">606</span></span></a> the
          fourth <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page244">[pg
          244]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg244"/>
          Cynibert,<a href="#note_607" id="noteref_607" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">607</span></span></a> who
          is there at present. Before Eadhaed, Sexwulf<a href="#note_608" id="noteref_608" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">608</span></span></a> was
          bishop as well of that province as of the Mercians and Midland
          Angles; so that, when expelled from Lindsey, he continued in the
          government of those provinces. Eadhaed, Bosa, and Eata, were
          ordained at York by archbishop Theodore;<a href="#note_609" id="noteref_609" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">609</span></span></a> who
          also, three years after the departure of Wilfrid, added two bishops
          to their number: Tunbert,<a href="#note_610" id="noteref_610" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">610</span></span></a>
          appointed to the church of Hagustald, Eata still continuing in that
          of Lindisfarne; and Trumwine<a href="#note_611" id="noteref_611" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">611</span></span></a> to
          the province of the Picts, which at that time was subject to
          English rule. Eadhaed returning from Lindsey, because Ethelred had
          recovered that province,<a href="#note_612" id="noteref_612" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">612</span></span></a> was
          placed by Theodore over the church of Ripon.<a href="#note_613" id="noteref_613" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">613</span></span></a></p>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page245">[pg 245]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg245"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc211"/> <a id="pdf212"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_IV_Chap_XIII"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XIII. How Bishop Wilfrid
          converted the province of the South Saxons to Christ. [681</span>
<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But Wilfrid was
          expelled from his bishopric, and having long travelled in many
          lands, went to Rome,<a href="#note_614" id="noteref_614" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">614</span></span></a> and
          afterwards returned to Britain. Though he could not, by reason of
          the enmity of the aforesaid king, be received into his own country
          or diocese, yet he could not be restrained from the ministry of the
          Gospel; for, taking his way into the province of the South
          Saxons,<a href="#note_615" id="noteref_615" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">615</span></span></a> which
          extends from Kent to the south and west, as far as the West Saxons,
          containing land of 7,000 families, and was at that time still in
          bondage to pagan rites, he administered to them the Word of faith,
          and the Baptism of salvation. Ethelwalch,<a href="#note_616" id="noteref_616" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">616</span></span></a> king
          of that nation, had been, not long before, baptized in the province
          of the Mercians, at the instance of King Wulfhere,<a href="#note_617" id="noteref_617" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">617</span></span></a> who
          was present, and received him as his godson when he came forth from
          the font, and in token of this adoption gave him two provinces, to
          wit, the Isle of Wight, and the province of the Meanware, in the
          country of the West Saxons.<a href="#note_618" id="noteref_618" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">618</span></span></a> The
          bishop, therefore, with the king's consent, or rather to his great
          joy, cleansed in the sacred font the foremost ealdormen and thegns
          of that country; and the priests, Eappa,<a href="#note_619" id="noteref_619" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">619</span></span></a> and
          Padda, and Burghelm, and Oiddi, either then, or <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page246">[pg 246]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg246"/> afterwards, baptized the rest of the
          people. The queen, whose name was Eabae, had been baptized in her
          own country, the province of the Hwiccas.<a href="#note_620" id="noteref_620" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">620</span></span></a> She
          was the daughter of Eanfrid, the brother of Aenhere,<a href="#note_621" id="noteref_621" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">621</span></span></a> who
          were both Christians, as were their people; but all the province of
          the South Saxons was ignorant of the Name of God and the faith. But
          there was among them a certain monk of the Scottish nation, whose
          name was Dicul,<a href="#note_622" id="noteref_622" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">622</span></span></a> who
          had a very small monastery, at the place called Bosanhamm,<a href="#note_623" id="noteref_623" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">623</span></span></a>
          encompassed by woods and seas, and in it there were five or six
          brothers, who served the Lord in humility and poverty; but none of
          the natives cared either to follow their course of life, or hear
          their preaching.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But Bishop
          Wilfrid, while preaching the Gospel to the people, not only
          delivered them from the misery of eternal damnation, but also from
          a terrible calamity of temporal death. For no rain had fallen in
          that district for three years before his arrival in the province,
          whereupon a grievous famine fell upon the people and pitilessly
          destroyed them; insomuch that it is said that often forty or fifty
          men, wasted with hunger, would go together to some precipice, or to
          the sea-shore, and there, hand in hand, in piteous wise cast them
          themselves down either to perish by the fall, or be swallowed up by
          the waves. But on the very day on which the nation received the
          Baptism of the faith, there fell a soft but plentiful rain; the
          earth revived, the fields grew green again, and the season was
          pleasant and fruitful. Thus the old superstition was cast away, and
          idolatry renounced, the heart and flesh of all rejoiced in the
          living God, for they perceived that He Who is the true God had
          enriched them by His heavenly grace with both inward and outward
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page247">[pg 247]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg247"/> blessings. For the
          bishop, when he came into the province, and found so great misery
          from famine there, taught them to get their food by fishing; for
          their sea and rivers abounded in fish, but the people had no skill
          to take any of them, except eels alone. The bishop's men having
          gathered eel-nets everywhere, cast them into the sea, and by the
          blessing of God took three hundred fishes of divers sorts, which
          being divided into three parts, they gave a hundred to the poor, a
          hundred to those of whom they had the nets, and kept a hundred for
          their own use. By this benefit the bishop gained the affections of
          them all, and they began more readily at his preaching to hope for
          heavenly blessings, seeing that by his help they had received those
          which are temporal.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At this time,
          King Ethelwalch gave to the most reverend prelate, Wilfrid, land to
          the extent of eighty-seven families, to maintain his company who
          were wandering in exile. The place is called Selaeseu,<a href="#note_624" id="noteref_624" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">624</span></span></a> that
          is, the Island of the Sea-Calf; it is encompassed by the sea on all
          sides, except the west, where is an entrance about the cast of a
          sling in width; which sort of place is by the Latins called a
          peninsula, by the Greeks, a cherronesos. Bishop Wilfrid, having
          this place given him, founded therein a monastery, chiefly of the
          brethren he had brought with him, and established a rule of life;
          and his successors are known to be there to this day. He himself,
          both in word and deed performed the duties of a bishop in those
          parts during the space of five years, until the death of King
          Egfrid,<a href="#note_625" id="noteref_625" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">625</span></span></a> and
          was justly honoured by all. And forasmuch as the king, together
          with the said place, gave him all the goods that were therein, with
          the lands and men, he instructed all the people in <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page248">[pg 248]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg248"/> the faith of Christ, and cleansed them
          in the water of Baptism. Among whom were two hundred and fifty
          bondsmen and bondswomen, all of whom he saved by Baptism from
          slavery to the Devil, and in like manner, by giving them their
          liberty, set them free from slavery to man.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc213"/> <a id="pdf214"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_IV_Chap_XIV"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XIV. How a pestilence ceased
          through the intercession of King Oswald. [681-686</span>
<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In this
          monastery, at that time, certain special manifestations of the
          heavenly grace are said to have been shown forth; in as much as the
          tyranny of the Devil had been recently cast out and Christ had
          begun to reign there. Of these I have thought it proper to
          perpetuate the memory of one which the most reverend Bishop
          Acca<a href="#note_626" id="noteref_626" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">626</span></span></a> was
          wont often to relate to me, affirming that it had been told him by
          most creditable brothers of the same monastery. About the same time
          that this province had received the faith of Christ, a grievous
          pestilence fell upon many provinces of Britain; which, also, by the
          Divine dispensation, reached to the aforesaid monastery, then
          governed by the most religious priest of Christ, Eappa;<a href="#note_627" id="noteref_627" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">627</span></span></a> and
          many, as well of those that had come thither with the bishop, as of
          those of the same province of the South Saxons who had been lately
          called to the faith, were snatched away out of this world. The
          brethren, therefore, thought fit to keep a fast of three days, and
          humbly to implore the Divine goodness to vouchsafe to have mercy on
          them, either by delivering from instant death those that were in
          danger by reason of the disease, or by saving those who were
          hurried out of this life from the eternal damnation of their
          souls.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">There was at
          that time in the monastery, a little boy, of the Saxon nation,
          lately called to the faith, who had been attacked by the same
          infirmity, and had long kept his bed. On the second day of the
          aforesaid fasting and <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page249">[pg
          249]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg249"/>
          prayer, it happened about the second hour of the day, that this boy
          was left alone in the place where he lay sick, when on a sudden,
          through the Divine disposition, the most blessed chiefs of the
          Apostles vouchsafed to appear to him; for he was a boy of a very
          simple and gentle disposition, and with sincere devotion observed
          the mysteries of the faith which he had received. The Apostles
          therefore, greeting him with loving words, said, <span class="tei tei-q">“My son, fear not death, concerning which thou art
          troubled; for this day we will bring thee to the kingdom of Heaven;
          but first thou must needs wait till the Masses are celebrated, that
          having received thy voyage provision,<a href="#note_628" id="noteref_628" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">628</span></span></a> the
          Body and Blood of our Lord, and so being set free from sickness and
          death, thou mayest be taken up to the everlasting joys in
          Heaven.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Call therefore to thee the priest, Eappa, and tell
          him, that the Lord has heard your prayers, and has favourably
          looked upon your devotion and your fast, and not one more shall die
          of this plague, either in the monastery or the lands adjacent to
          it; but all your people who any where labour under this sickness,
          shall be raised up from their weakness, and restored to their
          former health, saving thee alone, who art this day to be delivered
          from death, and to be carried into Heaven, to behold our Lord
          Christ, whom thou hast faithfully served. This favour the Divine
          mercy has vouchsafed to grant you, through the intercession of the
          godly King Oswald, beloved of God, who formerly nobly ruled over
          the nation of the Northumbrians, with the authority of a temporal
          kingdom and the devotion of Christian piety which leads to the
          eternal kingdom. For this very day that king was killed in body by
          the infidels in war, and straightway taken up to Heaven to the
          everlasting joys of souls, and brought into fellowship with the
          number of the elect. Let them look in their records,<a href="#note_629" id="noteref_629" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">629</span></span></a>
          wherein the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page250">[pg
          250]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg250"/>
          burial of the dead is set down, and they will find that he was,
          this day, as we have said, taken out of this world. Let them,
          therefore, celebrate Masses in all the oratories of this monastery,
          either in thanksgiving because their prayers are heard, or else in
          memory of the aforesaid King Oswald, who once governed their
          nation,<a href="#note_630" id="noteref_630" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">630</span></span></a> and
          therefore humbly prayed to the Lord for them, as for converts of
          his nation; and let all the brethren assemble in the church, and
          all communicate in the heavenly Sacrifices, and so let them cease
          to fast, and refresh the body also with the food that belongs to
          it.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The boy called
          the priest, and repeated all these words to him; and the priest
          carefully inquired after the habit and form of the men that had
          appeared to him. He answered, <span class="tei tei-q">“Their habit
          was altogether noble, and their countenances most pleasant and
          beautiful, such as I had never seen before, nor did I think there
          could be any men so fair and comely. One of them indeed was shorn
          like a clerk, the other had a long beard; and they said that one of
          them was called Peter, the other Paul; and they were the servants
          of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, sent by Him from Heaven to
          protect our monastery.”</span> The priest believed what the boy
          said, and going thence immediately, looked in his chronicle, and
          found that King Oswald had been killed on that very day. He then
          called the brethren, ordered dinner to be provided, Masses to be
          said, and all of them to communicate as usual; causing also a part
          of the same Sacrifice of the Lord's Oblation to be carried to the
          sick boy.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Soon after this,
          the boy died, on that same day; and by his death proved that the
          words which he had heard from the Apostles of Christ were true. And
          this moreover bore witness to the truth of his words, that none
          besides himself, belonging to the same monastery, was taken away at
          that time. And without doubt, by this vision, many that heard of it
          were wonderfully excited <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page251">[pg
          251]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg251"/>
          to implore the Divine mercy in adversity, and to submit to the
          wholesome remedy of fasting. From that time, the day of
          commemoration of that king and soldier of Christ began to be yearly
          honoured with the celebration of Masses, not only in that
          monastery, but in many other places.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc215"/> <a id="pdf216"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_IV_Chap_XV"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XV. How King Caedwalla, king of
          the Gewissae, having slain Ethelwalch, wasted that Province with
          cruel slaughter and devastation. [685</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the meantime,
          Caedwalla,<a href="#note_631" id="noteref_631" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">631</span></span></a> a
          young man of great vigour, of the royal race of the Gewissae,<a href="#note_632" id="noteref_632" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">632</span></span></a> an
          exile from his country, came with an army, slew Ethelwalch,<a href="#note_633" id="noteref_633" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">633</span></span></a> and
          wasted that province with cruel slaughter and devastation; but he
          was soon expelled by Berthun and Andhun, the king's ealdormen, who
          held in succession the government of the province. The first of
          them was afterwards killed by the same Caedwalla, when he was king
          of the Gewissae, and the province was reduced to more grievous
          slavery: Ini,<a href="#note_634" id="noteref_634" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">634</span></span></a>
          likewise, who reigned after Caedwalla, oppressed that country with
          the like servitude for many years; for which reason, during all
          that time, they could have no bishop of their own; but their first
          bishop, Wilfrid, having been recalled home, they were subject to
          the bishop of the Gewissae, that is, the West Saxons, who were in
          the city of Venta.<a href="#note_635" id="noteref_635" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">635</span></span></a></p>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page252">[pg 252]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg252"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc217"/> <a id="pdf218"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_IV_Chap_XVI"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XVI. How the Isle of Wight
          received Christian inhabitants, and two royal youths of that island
          were killed immediately after Baptism. [686</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">After Caedwalla
          had obtained possession of the kingdom of the Gewissae, he took
          also the Isle of Wight, which till then was entirely given over to
          idolatry, and by merciless slaughter endeavoured to destroy all the
          inhabitants thereof, and to place in their stead people from his
          own province; binding himself by a vow, though it is said that he
          was not yet regenerated in Christ, to give the fourth part of the
          land and of the spoil to the Lord, if he took the island. He
          fulfilled this vow by giving the same for the service of the Lord
          to Bishop Wilfrid, who happened at the time to have come thither
          from his own people.<a href="#note_636" id="noteref_636" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">636</span></span></a> The
          measure of that island, according to the computation of the
          English, is of twelve hundred families, wherefore an estate of
          three hundred families was given to the Bishop. The part which he
          received, he committed to one of his clerks called Bernwin, who was
          his sister's son, assigning to him a priest, whose name was
          Hiddila, to administer the Word and laver of life to all that would
          be saved.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Here I think it
          ought not to be omitted that, as the first fruits of those of that
          island who believed and were saved, two royal boys, brothers to
          Arwald, king of the island,<a href="#note_637" id="noteref_637" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">637</span></span></a> were
          crowned with the special grace of God. For when the enemy
          approached, they made their escape out of the island, and crossed
          over into the neighbouring province of the Jutes.<a href="#note_638" id="noteref_638" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">638</span></span></a>
          Coming to the place called At the Stone,<a href="#note_639" id="noteref_639" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">639</span></span></a> they
          thought to be concealed from the victorious king, but they were
          betrayed and ordered to be killed. This <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page253">[pg 253]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg253"/> being made known to a certain abbot and
          priest, whose name was Cynibert, who had a monastery not far from
          there, at a place called Hreutford,<a href="#note_640" id="noteref_640" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">640</span></span></a> that
          is, the Ford of Reeds, he came to the king, who then lay in
          concealment in those parts to be cured of the wounds which he had
          received whilst he was fighting in the Isle of Wight, and begged of
          him, that if the boys must needs be killed, he might be allowed
          first to instruct them in the mysteries of the Christian faith. The
          king consented, and the bishop having taught them the Word of
          truth, and cleansed them in the font of salvation, assured to them
          their entrance into the kingdom of Heaven. Then the executioner
          came, and they joyfully underwent the temporal death, through which
          they did not doubt they were to pass to the life of the soul, which
          is everlasting. Thus, after this manner, when all the provinces of
          Britain had received the faith of Christ, the Isle of Wight also
          received the same; yet because it was suffering under the
          affliction of foreign subjection, no man there received the office
          or see of a bishop, before Daniel, who is now bishop of the West
          Saxons.<a href="#note_641" id="noteref_641" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">641</span></span></a></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The island is
          situated opposite the borders of the South Saxons and the Gewissae,
          being separated from it by a sea, three miles wide, which is called
          Solvente.<a href="#note_642" id="noteref_642" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">642</span></span></a> In
          this sea, the two tides of the ocean, which break upon Britain all
          round its coasts from the boundless northern ocean, daily meet in
          conflict beyond the mouth of the river Homelea,<a href="#note_643" id="noteref_643" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">643</span></span></a> which
          runs into the aforesaid sea, through the lands of the Jutes,
          belonging to the country of the Gewissae; and after this struggle
          of the tides, they fall back and return into the ocean whence they
          come.</p>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page254">[pg 254]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg254"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc219"/> <a id="pdf220"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_IV_Chap_XVII"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XVII. Of the Synod held in the
          plain of Haethfelth, Archbishop Theodore being president.
          [680</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">About this time,
          Theodore being informed that the faith of the Church at
          Constantinople was much perplexed by the heresy of Eutyches,<a href="#note_644" id="noteref_644" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">644</span></span></a> and
          desiring that the Churches of the English, over which he presided,
          should remain free from all such taint, convened an assembly of
          venerable bishops and many learned men, and diligently inquired
          into the faith of each. He found them all of one mind in the
          Catholic faith, and this he caused to be committed to writing by
          the authority of the synod as a memorial, and for the instruction
          of succeeding generations; the beginning of which document is as
          follows:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“In the name of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ,
          under the rule of our most pious lords, Egfrid, king of of the
          Northumbrians, in the tenth year of his reign, the seventeenth of
          September, the eighth indiction; Ethelred, king of the Mercians, in
          the sixth year of his reign; Aldwulf king of the East Angles, in
          the seventeenth year of his reign; and Hlothere, king of Kent, in
          the seventh year of his reign;<a href="#note_645" id="noteref_645" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">645</span></span></a>
          Theodore, by the grace of God, archbishop of the island of Britain,
          and of the city of Canterbury, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page255">[pg 255]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg255"/> being president, and the other venerable
          bishops of the island of Britain sitting with him, the holy Gospels
          being laid before them, at the place which, in the Saxon tongue, is
          called Haethfelth,<a href="#note_646" id="noteref_646" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">646</span></span></a> we
          conferred together, and set forth the right and orthodox faith, as
          our Lord Jesus Christ in the flesh delivered the same to His
          disciples, who beheld His Presence and heard His words, and as it
          is delivered by the creed of the holy fathers, and by all holy and
          universal synods in general, and by the consent of all approved
          doctors of the Catholic Church. We, therefore, following them, in
          piety and orthodoxy, and professing accordance with their divinely
          inspired doctrine, do believe agreeably to it, and with the holy
          fathers confess the Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost, to be properly
          and truly a Trinity consubstantial in Unity, and Unity in Trinity,
          that is, one God in three Subsistences or consubstantial persons,
          of equal glory and honour.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">And after much
          more of the same sort, appertaining to the confession of the right
          faith, this holy synod added to its document, <span class="tei tei-q">“We acknowledge the five holy and general
          councils<a href="#note_647" id="noteref_647" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">647</span></span></a> of
          the blessed fathers acceptable to God; that is, of the 318
          assembled at Nicaea, against the most impious Arius and his tenets;
          and at Constantinople, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page256">[pg
          256]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg256"/>
          of 150, against the madness of Macedonius and Eudoxius, and their
          tenets; and at Ephesus, for the first time, of 200, against the
          most wicked Nestorius, and his tenets; and at Chalcedon, of 630,
          against Eutyches and Nestorius, and their tenets; and again, at
          Constantinople, in a fifth council, in the time of Justinian the
          younger,<a href="#note_648" id="noteref_648" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">648</span></span></a>
          against Theodorus, and the epistles of Theodoret and Ibas, and
          their tenets in opposition to Cyril.”</span> And again a little
          lower, <span class="tei tei-q">“the synod held in the city of Rome,
          in the time of the blessed Pope Martin,<a href="#note_649" id="noteref_649" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">649</span></span></a> in
          the eighth indiction, and in the ninth year of the most pious
          Emperor Constantine,<a href="#note_650" id="noteref_650" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">650</span></span></a> we
          also acknowledge. And we glorify our Lord Jesus Christ, as they
          glorified Him, neither adding aught nor taking away; anathematizing
          with hearts and lips those whom they anathematized, and receiving
          those whom they received; glorifying God the Father, Who is without
          beginning, and His only-begotten Son, begotten of the Father before
          the worlds, and the Holy Ghost proceeding ineffably from the Father
          and the Son,<a href="#note_651" id="noteref_651" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">651</span></span></a> even
          as those holy Apostles, prophets, and doctors, whom we have
          above-mentioned, did declare. And all we, who, with Archbishop
          Theodore, have thus set forth the Catholic faith, thereto
          subscribe.”</span></p>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page257">[pg 257]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg257"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc221"/> <a id="pdf222"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_IV_Chap_XVIII"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XVIII. Of John, the precentor
          of the Apostolic see, who came into Britain to teach. [680</span>
<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Among those who
          were present at this synod, and confirmed the decrees of the
          Catholic faith, was the venerable John,<a href="#note_652" id="noteref_652" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">652</span></span></a>
          archchanter of the church of the holy Apostle Peter,<a href="#note_653" id="noteref_653" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">653</span></span></a> and
          abbot of the monastery of the blessed Martin, who had come lately
          from Rome, by order of Pope Agatho, together with the most reverend
          Abbot Biscop, surnamed Benedict,<a href="#note_654" id="noteref_654" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">654</span></span></a> of
          whom mention has been made above. For the said Benedict, having
          built a monastery in Britain, in honour of the most blessed chief
          of the Apostles, at the mouth of the river Wear, went to Rome with
          Ceolfrid,<a href="#note_655" id="noteref_655" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">655</span></span></a> his
          companion and fellow-labourer in that work, who was after him abbot
          of the same monastery; he had been several times before at Rome,
          and was now honourably received by Pope Agatho of blessed memory;
          from whom he also asked and obtained, in order to <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page258">[pg 258]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg258"/> secure the immunities of the monastery
          which he had founded, a letter of privilege confirmed by apostolic
          authority, according to what he knew to be the will and grant of
          King Egfrid, by whose consent and gift of land he had built that
          monastery.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He was also
          allowed to take the aforesaid Abbot John with him into Britain,
          that he might teach in his monastery the system of singing
          throughout the year, as it was practised at St. Peter's at
          Rome.<a href="#note_656" id="noteref_656" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">656</span></span></a> The
          Abbot John did as he had been commanded by the Pope, teaching the
          singers of the said monastery the order and manner of singing and
          reading aloud, and committing to writing all that was requisite
          throughout the whole course of the year for the celebration of
          festivals; and these writings are still preserved in that
          monastery, and have been copied by many others elsewhere. The said
          John not only taught the brothers of that monastery, but such as
          had skill in singing resorted from almost all the monasteries of
          the same province to hear him, and many invited him to teach in
          other places.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Besides his task
          of singing and reading, he had also received a commission from the
          Apostolic Pope, carefully to inform himself concerning the faith of
          the English Church, and to give an account thereof on his return to
          Rome. For he also brought with him the decision of the synod of the
          blessed Pope Martin, held not long before at Rome,<a href="#note_657" id="noteref_657" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">657</span></span></a> with
          the consent of one hundred and five bishops, chiefly to refute
          those who taught that there is but one operation and will in
          Christ, and he gave it to be transcribed in the aforesaid monastery
          of the most religious Abbot Benedict. The men who followed such
          opinion greatly perplexed the faith of the Church of Constantinople
          at that time; but by the help of God they were then discovered and
          overcome.<a href="#note_658" id="noteref_658" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">658</span></span></a>
          Wherefore, Pope Agatho, being desirous to be informed concerning
          the state of the Church in Britain, as well as in other provinces,
          and to <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page259">[pg
          259]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg259"/>
          what extent it was clear from the contagion of heretics, gave this
          matter in charge to the most reverend Abbot John, then appointed to
          go to Britain. The synod we have spoken of having been called for
          this purpose in Britain, the Catholic faith was found untainted in
          all, and a report of the proceedings of the same was given him to
          carry to Rome.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But in his
          return to his own country, soon after crossing the sea, he fell
          sick and died; and his body, for the sake of St. Martin, in whose
          monastery he presided, was by his friends carried to Tours,<a href="#note_659" id="noteref_659" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">659</span></span></a> and
          honourably buried; for he had been kindly entertained by the Church
          there on his way to Britain, and earnestly entreated by the
          brethren, that in his return to Rome he would take that road, and
          visit their Church, and moreover he was there supplied with men to
          conduct him on his way, and assist him in the work enjoined upon
          him. Though he died by the way, yet the testimony of the Catholic
          faith of the English nation was carried to Rome, and received with
          great joy by the Apostolic Pope, and all those that heard or read
          it.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc223"/> <a id="pdf224"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_IV_Chap_XIX"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XIX. How Queen Ethelthryth
          always preserved her virginity, and her body suffered no corruption
          in the grave. [660-696</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">King Egfrid took
          to wife Ethelthryth, the daughter of Anna,<a href="#note_660" id="noteref_660" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">660</span></span></a> king
          of the East Angles, of whom mention has been often made; a man of
          true religion, and altogether noble in mind and deed. She had
          before been given in marriage to another, to wit, Tondbert,
          ealdorman<a href="#note_661" id="noteref_661" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">661</span></span></a> of
          the Southern Gyrwas; but he died soon after he had married her, and
          she was given to the aforesaid king. Though she lived with him
          twelve years, yet she preserved the glory of perfect virginity, as
          I was informed by Bishop <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page260">[pg
          260]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg260"/>
          Wilfrid, of blessed memory, of whom I inquired, because some
          questioned the truth thereof; and he told me that he was an
          undoubted witness to her virginity, forasmuch as Egfrid promised to
          give him many lands and much money if he could persuade the queen
          to consent to fulfil her marriage duty, for he knew the queen loved
          no man more than himself. And it is not to be doubted that this
          might take place in our age, which true histories tell us happened
          sometimes in former ages, by the help of the same Lord who promises
          to abide with us always, even unto the end of the world. For the
          divine miracle whereby her flesh, being buried, could not suffer
          corruption, is a token that she had not been defiled by man.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">She had long
          asked of the king that he would permit her to lay aside worldly
          cares, and to serve only Christ, the true King, in a monastery; and
          having at length with difficulty prevailed, she entered the
          monastery of the Abbess Aebba,<a href="#note_662" id="noteref_662" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">662</span></span></a> who
          was aunt to King Egfrid, at the place called the city of
          Coludi,<a href="#note_663" id="noteref_663" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">663</span></span></a>
          having received the veil of the religious habit from the hands of
          the aforesaid Bishop Wilfrid; but a year after she was herself made
          abbess in the district called Elge,<a href="#note_664" id="noteref_664" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">664</span></span></a>
          where, having built a monastery, she began, by the example of a
          heavenly life and by her teaching, to be the virgin mother of many
          virgins dedicated to God. It is told of her that from the time of
          her entering the monastery, she would never wear any linen but only
          woollen garments, and would <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page261">[pg 261]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg261"/> seldom wash in a hot bath, unless just before
          the greater festivals, as Easter, Whitsuntide, and the Epiphany,
          and then she did it last of all, when the other handmaids of Christ
          who were there had been washed, served by her and her attendants.
          She seldom ate more than once a day, excepting on the greater
          festivals, or some urgent occasion. Always, except when grievous
          sickness prevented her, from the time of matins till day-break, she
          continued in the church at prayer. Some also say, that by the
          spirit of prophecy she not only foretold the pestilence of which
          she was to die, but also, in the presence of all, revealed the
          number of those that should be then snatched away from this world
          out of her monastery. She was taken to the Lord, in the midst of
          her flock, seven years after she had been made abbess; and, as she
          had ordered, was buried among them in a wooden coffin in her turn,
          according to the order in which she had passed away.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">She was
          succeeded in the office of abbess by her sister Sexburg,<a href="#note_665" id="noteref_665" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">665</span></span></a> who
          had been wife to Earconbert, king of Kent. This abbess, when her
          sister had been buried sixteen years, thought fit to take up her
          bones, and, putting them into a new coffin, to translate them into
          the church. Accordingly she ordered some of the brothers to find a
          stone whereof to make a coffin for this purpose. They went on board
          ship, for the district of Ely is on every side encompassed with
          water and marshes, and has no large stones, and came to a small
          deserted city, not far from thence, which, in the language of the
          English, is called Grantacaestir,<a href="#note_666" id="noteref_666" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">666</span></span></a> and
          presently, near the city walls, they found a white marble
          coffin,<a href="#note_667" id="noteref_667" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">667</span></span></a> most
          beautifully <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page262">[pg
          262]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg262"/>
          wrought, and fitly covered with a lid of the same sort of stone.
          Perceiving, therefore, that the Lord had prospered their journey,
          they returned thanks to Him and carried it to the monastery.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">When the grave
          was opened and the body of the holy virgin and bride of Christ was
          brought into the light of day, it was found as free from corruption
          as if she had died and been buried on that very day; as the
          aforesaid Bishop Wilfrid, and many others that know it, testify.
          But the physician, Cynifrid, who was present at her death, and when
          she was taken up out of the grave, had more certain knowledge. He
          was wont to relate that in her sickness she had a very great tumour
          under her jaw. <span class="tei tei-q">“And I was ordered,”</span>
          said he, <span class="tei tei-q">“to lay open that tumour to let
          out the noxious matter in it, which I did, and she seemed to be
          somewhat more easy for two days, so that many thought she might
          recover from her infirmity; but on the third day she was attacked
          by the former pains, and being soon snatched out of the world, she
          exchanged all pain and death for everlasting life and health. And
          when, so many years after, her bones were to be taken out of the
          grave, a pavilion being spread over it, and all the congregation,
          the brothers on the one side, and the sisters on the other,
          standing about it singing, while the abbess, with a few others, had
          gone within to take up and wash the bones, on a sudden we heard the
          abbess within cry out with a loud voice, <span class="tei tei-q">‘Glory be to the name of the Lord.’</span> Not long
          after they called me in, opening the door of the pavilion, and I
          found the body of the holy virgin taken out of the grave and laid
          on a bed, like one asleep; then taking off the veil from the face,
          they also showed me that the incision which I had made was healed
          up; so that, in marvellous wise, instead of the open gaping wound
          with which she had been buried, there then appeared only the
          slightest trace of a scar. Besides, all the linen clothes in which
          the body had been wrapped, appeared entire and as fresh as if they
          had been that very day put about her chaste limbs.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">It is said that
          when she was sore troubled with the aforesaid tumour and pain in
          her jaw and neck, she took great <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page263">[pg 263]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg263"/> pleasure in that sort of sickness, and was
          wont to say, <span class="tei tei-q">“I know of a surety that I
          deservedly bear the weight of my trouble on my neck, for I remember
          that, when I was a young maiden, I bore on it the needless weight
          of necklaces;<a href="#note_668" id="noteref_668" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">668</span></span></a> and
          therefore I believe the Divine goodness would have me endure the
          pain in my neck, that so I may be absolved from the guilt of my
          needless levity, having now, instead of gold and pearls, the fiery
          heat of a tumour rising on my neck.”</span> It happened also that
          by the touch of those same linen clothes devils were expelled from
          bodies possessed, and other diseases were at divers times healed;
          and the coffin wherein she was first buried is said to have cured
          some of infirmities of the eyes, who, praying with their heads
          resting upon that coffin, were presently relieved of the pain or
          dimness in their eyes. So they washed the virgin's body, and having
          clothed it in new garments, brought it into the church, and laid it
          in the sarcophagus that had been brought, where it is held in great
          veneration to this day. The sarcophagus was found in a wonderful
          manner to fit the virgin's body as if it had been made purposely
          for her, and the place for the head, which was fashioned
          separately, appeared exactly shaped to the measurement of her
          head.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Elge is in the
          province of the East Angles, a district of about six hundred
          families, of the nature of an island, encompassed, as has been
          said, with marshes or waters, and therefore it has its name from
          the great plenty of eels taken in those marshes; there the
          aforesaid handmaid of Christ desired to have a monastery, because,
          as we have before mentioned, she came, according to the flesh, of
          that same province of the East Angles.</p>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page264">[pg 264]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg264"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc225"/> <a id="pdf226"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_IV_Chap_XX"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XX. A Hymn concerning
          her.</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">It seems fitting
          to insert in this history a hymn concerning virginity, which we
          composed in elegiac verse many years ago, in praise and honour of
          the same queen and bride of Christ, and therefore truly a queen,
          because the bride of Christ; and to imitate the method of Holy
          Scripture, wherein many songs are inserted in the history, and
          these, as is well known, are composed in metre and verse.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Trinity,<a href="#note_669" id="noteref_669" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">669</span></span></a>
          Gracious, Divine, Who rulest all the ages; favour my task, Trinity,
          Gracious, Divine.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Let Maro sound the trumpet of war, let us sing the
          gifts of peace; the gifts of Christ we sing, let Maro sound the
          trumpet of war.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Chaste is my song, no rape of guilty Helen; light
          tales shall be told by the wanton, chaste is my song.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I will tell of gifts from Heaven, not wars of hapless
          Troy; I will tell of gifts from Heaven, wherein the earth is
          glad.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Lo! the high God comes to the womb of a holy virgin,
          to be the Saviour of men, lo! the high God comes.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“A hallowed maid gives birth to Him Who gave the world
          its being; Mary, the gate of God, a maiden gives Him
          birth.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“The company of her fellows rejoices over the Virgin
          Mother of Him Who wields the thunder; a shining virgin band, the
          company of her fellows rejoices.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Her honour has made many a blossom to spring
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page265">[pg 265]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg265"/> from that pure
          shoot, virgin blossoms her honour has made to spring.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Scorched by the fierce flames, the maiden Agatha<a href="#note_670" id="noteref_670" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">670</span></span></a>
          yielded not; in like manner Eulalia endures, scorched by the fierce
          flames.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“The lofty soul of chaste Tecla overcomes the wild
          beasts; chaste Euphemia overcomes the accursed wild
          beasts.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Agnes joyously laughs at the sword, herself stronger
          than steel, Cecilia joyously laughs at the foemen's
          sword.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Many a triumph is mighty throughout the world in
          temperate hearts; throughout the world love of the temperate life
          is mighty.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yea, and our day likewise a peerless maiden has
          blessed; peerless our Ethelthryth shines.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Child of a noble sire, and glorious by royal birth,
          more noble in her Lord's sight, the child of a noble
          sire.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Thence she receives queenly honour and a sceptre in
          this world; thence she receives honour, awaiting higher honour
          above.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What need, gracious lady, to seek an earthly lord,
          even now given to the Heavenly Bridegroom?</span></p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page266">[pg 266]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg266"/>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Christ is at hand, the Bridegroom (why seek an earthly
          lord?) that thou mayst follow even now, methinks, in the steps of
          the Mother of Heaven's King, that thou too mayst be a mother in
          God.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Twelve years<a href="#note_671" id="noteref_671" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">671</span></span></a> she
          had reigned, a bride dedicated to God, then in the cloister dwelt,
          a bride dedicated to God.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“To Heaven all consecrated she lived, abounding in
          lofty deeds, then to Heaven all consecrated she gave up her
          soul.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Twice eight Novembers<a href="#note_672" id="noteref_672" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">672</span></span></a> the
          maid's fair flesh lay in the tomb, nor did the maid's fair flesh
          see corruption in the tomb.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“This was Thy work, O Christ, that her very garments
          were bright and undefiled even in the grave; O Christ, this was Thy
          work.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“The dark serpent<a href="#note_673" id="noteref_673" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">673</span></span></a> flies
          before the honour due to the holy raiment; disease is driven away,
          and the dark serpent flies.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Rage fills the foe who of old conquered Eve; exultant
          the maiden triumphs and rage fills the foe.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Behold, O bride of God, thy glory upon earth; the
          glory that awaits thee in the Heavens behold, O bride of
          God.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“In gladness thou receivest gifts, bright amidst the
          festal torches; behold! the Bridegroom comes, in gladness thou
          receivest gifts.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And a new song thou singest to the tuneful harp; a
          new-made bride, thou exultest in the tuneful hymn.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“None can part her from them which follow the Lamb
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page267">[pg 267]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg267"/> enthroned on high,
          whom none had severed from the Love enthroned on high.”</span></p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc227"/> <a id="pdf228"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_IV_Chap_XXI"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XXI. How Bishop Theodore made
          peace between the kings Egfrid and Ethelred. [679</span>
<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the ninth
          year of the reign of King Egfrid, a great battle<a href="#note_674" id="noteref_674" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">674</span></span></a> was
          fought between him and Ethelred, king of the Mercians, near the
          river Trent, and Aelfwine,<a href="#note_675" id="noteref_675" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">675</span></span></a>
          brother to King Egfrid, was slain, a youth about eighteen years of
          age, and much beloved by both provinces; for King Ethelred had
          married his sister Osthryth.<a href="#note_676" id="noteref_676" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">676</span></span></a> There
          was now reason to expect a more bloody war, and more lasting enmity
          between those kings and their fierce nations; but Theodore, the
          bishop, beloved of God, relying on the Divine aid, by his wholesome
          admonitions wholly extinguished the dangerous fire that was
          breaking out; so that the kings and their people on both sides were
          appeased, and no man was put to death, but only the due mulct<a href="#note_677" id="noteref_677" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">677</span></span></a> paid
          to the king who was the avenger for the death of his brother; and
          this peace continued long after between those kings and between
          their kingdoms.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc229"/> <a id="pdf230"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_IV_Chap_XXII"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XXII. How a certain captive's
          chains fell off when Masses were sung for him. [679</span>
<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the aforesaid
          battle, wherein King Aelfwine was killed, a memorable incident is
          known to have happened, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page268">[pg
          268]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg268"/>
          which I think ought by no means to be passed over in silence; for
          the story will be profitable to the salvation of many. In that
          battle a youth called Imma, one of the king's thegns, was struck
          down, and having lain as if dead all that day and the next night
          among the bodies of the slain, at length he came to himself and
          revived, and sitting up, bound his own wounds as best as he could.
          Then having rested awhile, he stood up, and went away to see if he
          could find any friends to take care of him; but in so doing he was
          discovered and taken by some of the enemy's army, and carried
          before their lord, who was one of King Ethelred's nobles.<a href="#note_678" id="noteref_678" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">678</span></span></a> Being
          asked by him who he was, and fearing to own himself a thegn, he
          answered that he was a peasant, a poor man and married, and he
          declared that he had come to the war with others like himself to
          bring provisions to the army. The noble entertained him, and
          ordered his wounds to be dressed, and when he began to recover, to
          prevent his escaping, he ordered him to be bound at night. But he
          could not be bound, for as soon as they that bound him were gone,
          his bonds were loosed.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Now he had a
          brother called Tunna, who was a priest and abbot of a monastery in
          the city which is still called Tunnacaestir after him.<a href="#note_679" id="noteref_679" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">679</span></span></a> This
          man, hearing that his brother had been killed in the battle, went
          to see if haply he could find his body; and finding another very
          like him in all respects, he believed it to be his. So he carried
          it to his monastery, and buried it honourably, and took care often
          to say Masses for the absolution of his soul; the celebration
          whereof occasioned what I have said, that none could bind him but
          he was presently loosed again. In the meantime, the noble that had
          kept him was amazed, and began to inquire why he could not be
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page269">[pg 269]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg269"/> bound; whether
          perchance he had any spells about him, such as are spoken of in
          stories. He answered that he knew nothing of those arts;
          <span class="tei tei-q">“but I have,”</span> said he, <span class="tei tei-q">“a brother who is a priest in my country, and I know
          that he, supposing me to be killed, is saying frequent Masses for
          me; and if I were now in the other life, my soul there, through his
          intercession, would be delivered from penalty.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">When he had been
          a prisoner with the noble some time, those who attentively observed
          him, by his countenance, habit, and discourse, took notice, that he
          was not of the meaner sort, as he had said, but of some quality.
          The noble then privately sending for him, straitly questioned him,
          whence he came, promising to do him no harm on that account if he
          would frankly confess who he was. This he did, declaring that he
          had been a thegn of the king's, and the noble answered,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“I perceived by all your answers that you
          were no peasant. And now you deserve to die, because all my
          brothers and relations were killed in that fight; yet I will not
          put you to death, that I may not break my promise.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">As soon,
          therefore, as he was recovered, he sold him to a certain Frisian at
          London, but he could not in any wise be bound either by him, or as
          he was being led thither. But when his enemies had put all manner
          of bonds on him, and the buyer perceived that he could in no way be
          bound, he gave him leave to ransom himself if he could. Now it was
          at the third hour, when the Masses were wont to be said, that his
          bonds were most frequently loosed. He, having taken an oath that he
          would either return, or send his owner the money for the ransom,
          went into Kent to King Hlothere, who was son to the sister of Queen
          Ethelthryth,<a href="#note_680" id="noteref_680" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">680</span></span></a> above
          spoken of, for he had once been that queen's thegn. From him he
          asked and obtained the price of his freedom, and as he had
          promised, sent it to his master for his ransom.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Returning
          afterwards into his own country, and coming to his brother, he gave
          him an exact account of all his <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page270">[pg 270]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg270"/> misfortunes, and the consolation afforded to
          him in them; and from what his brother told him he understood, that
          his bonds had been generally loosed at those times when Masses had
          been celebrated for him; and he perceived that other advantages and
          blessings which had fallen to his lot in his time of danger, had
          been conferred on him from Heaven, through the intercession of his
          brother, and the Oblation of the saving Sacrifice. Many, on hearing
          this account from the aforesaid man, were stirred up in faith and
          pious devotion to prayer, or to alms-giving, or to make an offering
          to God of the Sacrifice of the holy Oblation, for the deliverance
          of their friends who had departed this world; for they knew that
          such saving Sacrifice availed for the eternal redemption both of
          body and soul. This story was also told me by some of those who had
          heard it related by the man himself to whom it happened; therefore,
          since I had a clear understanding of it, I have not hesitated to
          insert it in my Ecclesiastical History.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc231"/> <a id="pdf232"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_IV_Chap_XXIII"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XXIII. Of the life and death of
          the Abbess Hilda. [614-680</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year
          after this, that is the year of our Lord 680, the most religious
          handmaid of Christ, Hilda,<a href="#note_681" id="noteref_681" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">681</span></span></a>
          abbess of the monastery that is called Streanaeshalch,<a href="#note_682" id="noteref_682" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">682</span></span></a> as we
          mentioned above, after having done many heavenly deeds on earth,
          passed thence to receive the rewards of the heavenly life, on the
          17th of November, at the age of sixty-six years. Her life falls
          into two equal parts, for the first thirty-three years of it she
          spent living most nobly in the secular habit; and still more nobly
          dedicated the remaining half to the Lord in the monastic life. For
          she was nobly born, being the daughter of Hereric,<a href="#note_683" id="noteref_683" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">683</span></span></a>
          nephew to King Edwin, and with that king she also received
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page271">[pg 271]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg271"/> the faith and
          mysteries of Christ, at the preaching of Paulinus, of blessed
          memory,<a href="#note_684" id="noteref_684" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">684</span></span></a> the
          first bishop of the Northumbrians, and preserved the same undefiled
          till she attained to the vision of our Lord in Heaven.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">When she had
          resolved to quit the secular habit, and to serve Him alone, she
          withdrew into the province of the East Angles, for she was allied
          to the king there;<a href="#note_685" id="noteref_685" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">685</span></span></a> being
          desirous to cross over thence into Gaul, forsaking her native
          country and all that she had, and so to live a stranger for our
          Lord's sake in the monastery of Cale,<a href="#note_686" id="noteref_686" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">686</span></span></a> that
          she might the better attain to the eternal country in heaven. For
          her sister Heresuid, mother to Aldwulf,<a href="#note_687" id="noteref_687" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">687</span></span></a> king
          of the East Angles, was at that time living in the same monastery,
          under regular discipline, waiting for an everlasting crown; and led
          by her example, she continued a whole year in the aforesaid
          province, with the design of going abroad; but afterwards, Bishop
          Aidan recalled her to her home, and she received land to the extent
          of one family on the north side of the river Wear;<a href="#note_688" id="noteref_688" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">688</span></span></a> where
          likewise for a year she led a monastic life, with very few
          companions.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">After this she
          was made abbess in the monastery called Heruteu,<a href="#note_689" id="noteref_689" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">689</span></span></a> which
          monastery had been founded, not long before, by the pious handmaid
          of Christ, Heiu,<a href="#note_690" id="noteref_690" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">690</span></span></a> who
          is said to have been the first woman in the province of the
          Northumbrians who took upon her the vows and habit of a nun, being
          consecrated by Bishop Aidan; but she, soon after she had founded
          that monastery, retired to the city of Calcaria,<a href="#note_691" id="noteref_691" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">691</span></span></a> which
          is called Kaelcacaestir <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page272">[pg
          272]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg272"/>
          by the English, and there fixed her dwelling. Hilda, the handmaid
          of Christ, being set over that monastery, began immediately to
          order it in all things under a rule of life, according as she had
          been instructed by learned men; for Bishop Aidan, and others of the
          religious that knew her, frequently visited her and loved her
          heartily, and diligently instructed her, because of her innate
          wisdom and love of the service of God.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">When she had for
          some years governed this monastery, wholly intent upon establishing
          a rule of life, it happened that she also undertook either to build
          or to set in order a monastery in the place called Streanaeshalch,
          and this work which was laid upon her she industriously performed;
          for she put this monastery under the same rule of monastic life as
          the former; and taught there the strict observance of justice,
          piety, chastity, and other virtues, and particularly of peace and
          charity; so that, after the example of the primitive Church, no one
          there was rich, and none poor, for they had all things common, and
          none had any private property. Her prudence was so great, that not
          only meaner men in their need, but sometimes even kings and
          princes, sought and received her counsel; she obliged those who
          were under her direction to give so much time to reading of the
          Holy Scriptures, and to exercise themselves so much in works of
          justice, that many might readily be found there fit for the
          priesthood and the service of the altar.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Indeed we have
          seen five from that monastery who afterwards became bishops, and
          all of them men of singular merit and sanctity, whose names were
          Bosa,<a href="#note_692" id="noteref_692" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">692</span></span></a>
          Aetla,<a href="#note_693" id="noteref_693" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">693</span></span></a>
<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page273">[pg 273]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg273"/> Oftfor,<a href="#note_694" id="noteref_694" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">694</span></span></a>
          John,<a href="#note_695" id="noteref_695" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">695</span></span></a> and
          Wilfrid.<a href="#note_696" id="noteref_696" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">696</span></span></a> Of
          the first we have said above that he was consecrated bishop of
          York; of the second, it may be briefly stated that he was appointed
          bishop of Dorchester. Of the last two we shall tell hereafter, that
          the former was ordained bishop of Hagustald, the other of the
          church of York; of the third, we may here mention that, having
          applied himself to the reading and observance of the Scriptures in
          both the monasteries of the Abbess Hilda,<a href="#note_697" id="noteref_697" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">697</span></span></a> at
          length being desirous to attain to greater perfection, he went into
          Kent, to Archbishop Theodore, of blessed memory; where having spent
          some time in sacred studies, he resolved to go to Rome also, which,
          in those days, was esteemed a very salutary undertaking. Returning
          thence into Britain, he took his way into the province of the
          Hwiccas,<a href="#note_698" id="noteref_698" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">698</span></span></a> where
          King Osric then ruled,<a href="#note_699" id="noteref_699" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">699</span></span></a> and
          continued there a long time, preaching the Word of faith, and
          showing an example of good life to all that saw and heard him. At
          that time, Bosel, the bishop of that province,<a href="#note_700" id="noteref_700" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">700</span></span></a>
          laboured under <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page274">[pg
          274]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg274"/>
          such weakness of body, that he could not himself perform episcopal
          functions; for which reason, Oftfor was, by universal consent,
          chosen bishop in his stead, and by order of King Ethelred,<a href="#note_701" id="noteref_701" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">701</span></span></a>
          consecrated by Bishop Wilfrid,<a href="#note_702" id="noteref_702" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">702</span></span></a> of
          blessed memory, who was then Bishop of the Midland Angles, because
          Archbishop Theodore was dead, and no other bishop ordained in his
          place. A little while before, that is, before the election of the
          aforesaid man of God, Bosel, Tatfrid,<a href="#note_703" id="noteref_703" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">703</span></span></a> a man
          of great industry and learning, and of excellent ability, had been
          chosen bishop for that province, from the monastery of the same
          abbess, but had been snatched away by an untimely death, before he
          could be ordained.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Thus this
          handmaid of Christ, the Abbess Hilda, whom all that knew her called
          Mother, for her singular piety and grace, was not only an example
          of good life, to those that lived in her monastery, but afforded
          occasion of amendment and salvation to many who lived at a
          distance, to whom the blessed fame was brought of her industry and
          virtue. For it was meet that the dream of her mother, Bregusuid,
          during her infancy, should be fulfilled. Now Bregusuid, at the time
          that her husband, Hereric, lived in banishment, under Cerdic,<a href="#note_704" id="noteref_704" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">704</span></span></a> king
          of the Britons, where he was also poisoned, fancied, in a dream,
          that he was suddenly taken away from her and she was seeking for
          him most carefully, but could find no sign of him anywhere. After
          an anxious search for him, all at once she found a most precious
          necklace under her garment, and whilst she was looking on it very
          attentively, it seemed to shine forth with such a blaze of light
          that it filled all Britain with the glory of its brilliance. This
          dream was doubtless fulfilled in her daughter that <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page275">[pg 275]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg275"/> we speak of, whose life was an example
          of the works of light, not only blessed to herself, but to many who
          desired to live aright.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">When she had
          governed this monastery many years, it pleased Him Who has made
          such merciful provision for our salvation, to give her holy soul
          the trial of a long infirmity of the flesh, to the end that,
          according to the Apostle's example, her virtue might be made
          perfect in weakness. Struck down with a fever, she suffered from a
          burning heat, and was afflicted with the same trouble for six years
          continually; during all which time she never failed either to
          return thanks to her Maker, or publicly and privately to instruct
          the flock committed to her charge; for taught by her own experience
          she admonished all men to serve the Lord dutifully, when health of
          body is granted to them, and always to return thanks faithfully to
          Him in adversity, or bodily infirmity. In the seventh year of her
          sickness, when the disease turned inwards, her last day came, and
          about cockcrow, having received the voyage provision<a href="#note_705" id="noteref_705" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">705</span></span></a> of
          Holy Housel, and called together the handmaids of Christ that were
          within the same monastery, she admonished them to preserve the
          peace of the Gospel among themselves, and with all others; and even
          as she spoke her words of exhortation, she joyfully saw death come,
          or, in the words of our Lord, passed from death unto life.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">That same night
          it pleased Almighty God, by a manifest vision, to make known her
          death in another monastery, at a distance from hers, which she had
          built that same year, and which is called Hacanos.<a href="#note_706" id="noteref_706" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">706</span></span></a> There
          was in that monastery, a certain nun called Begu,<a href="#note_707" id="noteref_707" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">707</span></span></a> who,
          having dedicated her virginity to the Lord, had served Him upwards
          of thirty years in the monastic life. This nun was resting
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page276">[pg 276]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg276"/> in the dormitory of
          the sisters, when on a sudden she heard in the air the well-known
          sound of the bell, which used to awake and call them to prayers,
          when any one of them was taken out of this world, and opening her
          eyes, as she thought, she saw the roof of the house open, and a
          light shed from above filling all the place. Looking earnestly upon
          that light, she saw the soul of the aforesaid handmaid of God in
          that same light, being carried to heaven attended and guided by
          angels. Then awaking, and seeing the other sisters lying round
          about her, she perceived that what she had seen had been revealed
          to her either in a dream or a vision; and rising immediately in
          great fear, she ran to the virgin who then presided in the
          monastery in the place of the abbess,<a href="#note_708" id="noteref_708" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">708</span></span></a> and
          whose name was Frigyth, and, with many tears and lamentations, and
          heaving deep sighs, told her that the Abbess Hilda, mother of them
          all, had departed this life, and had in her sight ascended to the
          gates of eternal light, and to the company of the citizens of
          heaven, with a great light, and with angels for her guides. Frigyth
          having heard it, awoke all the sisters, and calling them to the
          church, admonished them to give themselves to prayer and singing of
          psalms, for the soul of their mother; which they did earnestly
          during the remainder of the night; and at break of day, the
          brothers came with news of her death, from the place where she had
          died. They answered that they knew it before, and then related in
          order how and when they had learnt it, by which it appeared that
          her death had been revealed to them in a vision that same hour in
          which the brothers said that she had died. Thus by a fair harmony
          of events Heaven ordained, that when some saw her departure out of
          this world, the others should have knowledge of her entrance into
          the eternal life of souls. These monasteries are about thirteen
          miles distant from each other.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">It is also told,
          that her death was, in a vision, made known the same night to one
          of the virgins dedicated to <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page277">[pg 277]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg277"/> God, who loved her with a great love, in the
          same monastery where the said handmaid of God died. This nun saw
          her soul ascend to heaven in the company of angels; and this she
          openly declared, in the very same hour that it happened, to those
          handmaids of Christ that were with her; and aroused them to pray
          for her soul, even before the rest of the community had heard of
          her death. The truth of which was known to the whole community in
          the morning. This same nun was at that time with some other
          handmaids of Christ, in the remotest part of the monastery, where
          the women who had lately entered the monastic life were wont to
          pass their time of probation, till they were instructed according
          to rule, and admitted into the fellowship of the community.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc233"/> <a id="pdf234"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_IV_Chap_XXIV"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XXIV. That there was in her
          monastery a brother, on whom the gift of song was bestowed by
          Heaven.</span><a href="#note_709" id="noteref_709" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">709</span></span></a><span style="font-size: 144%">[680</span>
<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">There was in the
          monastery of this abbess a certain brother, marked in a special
          manner by the grace of God, for he was wont to make songs of piety
          and religion, so that whatever was expounded to him out of
          Scripture, he turned ere long into verse expressive of much
          sweetness and penitence, in English, which was his native language.
          By his songs the minds of many were often fired with contempt of
          the world, and desire of the heavenly life. Others of the English
          nation after him <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page278">[pg
          278]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg278"/>
          attempted to compose religious poems, but none could equal him, for
          he did not learn the art of poetry from men, neither was he taught
          by man, but by God's grace he received the free gift of song, for
          which reason he never could compose any trivial or vain poem, but
          only those which concern religion it behoved his religious tongue
          to utter. For having lived in the secular habit till he was well
          advanced in years, he had never learned anything of versifying; and
          for this reason sometimes at a banquet, when it was agreed to make
          merry by singing in turn, if he saw the harp come towards him, he
          would rise up from table and go out and return home.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Once having done
          so and gone out of the house where the banquet was, to the stable,
          where he had to take care of the cattle that night, he there
          composed himself to rest at the proper time. Thereupon one stood by
          him in his sleep, and saluting him, and calling him by his name,
          said, <span class="tei tei-q">“Cædmon, sing me something.”</span>
          But he answered, <span class="tei tei-q">“I cannot sing, and for
          this cause I left the banquet and retired hither, because I could
          not sing.”</span> Then he who talked to him replied, <span class="tei tei-q">“Nevertheless thou must needs sing to me.”</span>
<span class="tei tei-q">“What must I sing?”</span> he asked.
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Sing the beginning of creation,”</span>
          said the other. Having received this answer he straightway began to
          sing verses to the praise of God the Creator, which he had never
          heard, the purport whereof was after this manner: <span class="tei tei-q">“Now must we praise the Maker of the heavenly kingdom,
          the power of the Creator and His counsel, the deeds of the Father
          of glory. How He, being the eternal God, became the Author of all
          wondrous works, Who being the Almighty Guardian of the human race,
          first created heaven for the sons of men to be the covering of
          their dwelling place, and next the earth.”</span> This is the sense
          but not the order of the words as he sang them in his sleep; for
          verses, though never so well composed, cannot be literally
          translated out of one language into another without loss of their
          beauty and loftiness. Awaking from his sleep, he remembered all
          that he had sung in his dream, and soon added more after the same
          manner, in words which worthily expressed the praise of
          God.</p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page279">[pg
          279]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg279"/>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the morning
          he came to the reeve<a href="#note_710" id="noteref_710" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">710</span></span></a> who
          was over him, and having told him of the gift he had received, was
          conducted to the abbess, and bidden, in the presence of many
          learned men, to tell his dream, and repeat the verses, that they
          might all examine and give their judgement upon the nature and
          origin of the gift whereof he spoke. And they all judged that
          heavenly grace had been granted to him by the Lord. They expounded
          to him a passage of sacred history or doctrine, enjoining upon him,
          if he could, to put it into verse. Having undertaken this task, he
          went away, and returning the next morning, gave them the passage he
          had been bidden to translate, rendered in most excellent verse.
          Whereupon the abbess, joyfully recognizing the grace of God in the
          man, instructed him to quit the secular habit, and take upon him
          monastic vows; and having received him into the monastery, she and
          all her people admitted him to the company of the brethren, and
          ordered that he should be taught the whole course of sacred
          history. So he, giving ear to all that he could learn, and bearing
          it in mind, and as it were ruminating, like a clean animal,<a href="#note_711" id="noteref_711" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">711</span></span></a>
          turned it into most harmonious verse; and sweetly singing it, made
          his masters in their turn his hearers. He sang the creation of the
          world, the origin of man, and all the history of Genesis, the
          departure of the children of Israel out of Egypt, their entrance
          into the promised land, and many other histories from Holy
          Scripture; the Incarnation, Passion, Resurrection of our Lord, and
          His Ascension into heaven; the coming of the Holy Ghost, and the
          teaching of the Apostles; likewise he made many songs concerning
          the terror of future judgement, the horror of the pains of hell,
          and the joys of heaven; besides many more about the blessings and
          the judgements of God, by all of which he endeavoured to draw men
          away from the love of sin, and to excite in them devotion to
          well-doing and perseverance therein. For he was <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page280">[pg 280]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg280"/> a very religious man, humbly submissive
          to the discipline of monastic rule, but inflamed with fervent zeal
          against those who chose to do otherwise; for which reason he made a
          fair ending of his life.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">For when the
          hour of his departure drew near, it was preceded by a bodily
          infirmity under which he laboured for the space of fourteen days,
          yet it was of so mild a nature that he could talk and go about the
          whole time. In his neighbourhood was the house to which those that
          were sick, and like to die, were wont to be carried. He desired the
          person that ministered to him, as the evening came on of the night
          in which he was to depart this life, to make ready a place there
          for him to take his rest. The man, wondering why he should desire
          it, because there was as yet no sign of his approaching death,
          nevertheless did his bidding. When they had lain down there, and
          had been conversing happily and pleasantly for some time with those
          that were in the house before, and it was now past midnight, he
          asked them, whether they had the Eucharist within?<a href="#note_712" id="noteref_712" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">712</span></span></a> They
          answered, <span class="tei tei-q">“What need of the Eucharist? for
          you are not yet appointed to die, since you talk so merrily with
          us, as if you were in good health.”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Nevertheless,”</span> said he, <span class="tei tei-q">“bring me the Eucharist.”</span> Having received It
          into his hand, he asked, whether they were all in charity with him,
          and had no complaint against him, nor any quarrel or grudge. They
          answered, that they were all in perfect charity with him, and free
          from all anger; and in their turn they asked him to be of the same
          mind towards them. He answered at once, <span class="tei tei-q">“I
          am in charity, my children, with all the servants of God.”</span>
          Then strengthening himself with the heavenly Viaticum, he prepared
          for the entrance into another life, and asked how near the time was
          when the brothers should be awakened to sing the nightly praises of
          the Lord?<a href="#note_713" id="noteref_713" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">713</span></span></a> They
          answered, <span class="tei tei-q">“It is not far off.”</span> Then
          he said, <span class="tei tei-q">“It is well, let us await that
          hour;”</span> and signing <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page281">[pg
          281]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg281"/>
          himself with the sign of the Holy Cross, he laid his head on the
          pillow, and falling into a slumber for a little while, so ended his
          life in silence.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Thus it came to
          pass, that as he had served the Lord with a simple and pure mind,
          and quiet devotion, so he now departed to behold His Presence,
          leaving the world by a quiet death; and that tongue, which had
          uttered so many wholesome words in praise of the Creator, spake its
          last words also in His praise, while he signed himself with the
          Cross, and commended his spirit into His hands; and by what has
          been here said, he seems to have had foreknowledge of his
          death.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc235"/> <a id="pdf236"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_IV_Chap_XXV"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XXV. Of the vision that
          appeared to a certain man of God before the monastery of the city
          Coludi was burned down.</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At this time,
          the monastery of virgins, called the city of Coludi,<a href="#note_714" id="noteref_714" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">714</span></span></a>
          above-mentioned, was burned down, through carelessness; and yet all
          that knew it might have been aware that it happened by reason of
          the wickedness of those who dwelt in it, and chiefly of those who
          seemed to be the greatest. But there wanted not a warning of the
          approaching punishment from the Divine mercy whereby they might
          have been led to amend their ways, and by fasting and tears and
          prayers, like the Ninevites, have averted the anger of the just
          Judge.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">For there was in
          that monastery a man of the Scottish race, called Adamnan,<a href="#note_715" id="noteref_715" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">715</span></span></a>
          leading a life entirely devoted to God in continence and prayer,
          insomuch that he never took any food or drink, except only on
          Sundays and Thursdays; and often spent whole nights in watching and
          prayer. This strictness in austerity of life he had first adopted
          from the necessity of correcting the evil that <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page282">[pg 282]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg282"/> was in him; but in process of time the
          necessity became a custom.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">For in his youth
          he had been guilty of some sin for which, when he came to himself,
          he conceived a great horror, and dreaded lest he should be punished
          for the same by the righteous Judge. Betaking himself, therefore,
          to a priest, who, he hoped, might show him the way of salvation, he
          confessed his guilt, and desired to be advised how he might escape
          the wrath to come. The priest having heard his offence, said,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“A great wound requires greater care in the
          healing thereof; wherefore give yourself as far as you are able to
          fasting and psalms, and prayer, to the end that thus coming before
          the presence of the Lord in confession,”</span><a href="#note_716" id="noteref_716" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">716</span></span></a> you
          may find Him merciful. But he, being oppressed with great grief by
          reason of his guilty conscience, and desiring to be the sooner
          loosed from the inward fetters of sin, which lay heavy upon him,
          answered, <span class="tei tei-q">“I am still young in years and
          strong of body, and shall, therefore, easily bear all whatsoever
          you shall enjoin me to do, if so be that I may be saved in the day
          of the Lord, even though you should bid me spend the whole night
          standing in prayer, and pass the whole week in abstinence.”</span>
          The priest replied, <span class="tei tei-q">“It is much for you to
          continue for a whole week without bodily sustenance; it is enough
          to observe a fast for two or three days; do this till I come again
          to you in a short time, when I will more fully show you what you
          ought to do, and how long to persevere in your penance.”</span>
          Having so said, and prescribed the measure of his penance, the
          priest went away, and upon some sudden occasion passed over into
          Ireland, which was his native country, and returned no more to him,
          as he had appointed. But the man remembering this injunction and
          his own promise, gave himself up entirely to tears of penitence,
          holy vigils and continence; so that he only took food on Thursdays
          and Sundays, as has been said; and continued fasting all the other
          days of the week. When he heard that his priest had gone to
          Ireland, and had died there, he ever <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page283">[pg 283]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg283"/> after observed this manner of abstinence,
          which had been appointed for him as we have said; and as he had
          begun that course through the fear of God, in penitence for his
          guilt, so he still continued the same unremittingly for the love of
          God, and through delight in its rewards.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Having practised
          this carefully for a long time, it happened that he had gone on a
          certain day to a distance from the monastery, accompanied by one
          the brothers; and as they were returning from this journey, when
          they drew near to the monastery, and beheld its lofty buildings,
          the man of God burst into tears, and his countenance discovered the
          trouble of his heart. His companion, perceiving it, asked what was
          the reason, to which he answered: <span class="tei tei-q">“The time
          is at hand when a devouring fire shall reduce to ashes all the
          buildings which you here behold, both public and private.”</span>
          The other, hearing these words, when they presently came into the
          monastery, told them to Aebba,<a href="#note_717" id="noteref_717" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">717</span></span></a> the
          mother of the community. She with good cause being much troubled at
          that prediction, called the man to her, and straitly questioned him
          concerning the matter and how he came to know it. He answered,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Being engaged one night lately in watching
          and singing psalms, on a sudden I saw one standing by me whose
          countenance I did not know, and I was startled at his presence, but
          he bade me not to fear, and speaking to me like a friend he said,
          <span class="tei tei-q">‘You do well in that you have chosen rather
          at this time of rest not to give yourself up to sleep, but to
          continue in watching and prayer.’</span> I answered, <span class="tei tei-q">‘I know I have great need to continue in wholesome
          watching and earnest prayer to the Lord to pardon my
          transgressions.’</span> He replied, <span class="tei tei-q">‘You
          speak truly, for you and many more have need to redeem their sins
          by good works, and when they cease from temporal labours, then to
          labour the more eagerly for desire of eternal blessings; but this
          very few do; for I, having now gone through all this monastery in
          order, have looked into the huts<a href="#note_718" id="noteref_718" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">718</span></span></a> and
          beds of all, and found <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page284">[pg
          284]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg284"/>
          none of them except yourself busy about the health of his soul; but
          all of them, both men and women, are either sunk in slothful sleep,
          or are awake in order to commit sin; for even the cells that were
          built for prayer or reading, are now converted into places of
          feasting, drinking, talking, and other delights; the very virgins
          dedicated to God, laying aside the respect due to their profession,
          whensoever they are at leisure, apply themselves to weaving fine
          garments, wherewith to adorn themselves like brides, to the danger
          of their state, or to gain the friendship of strange men; for which
          reason, as is meet, a heavy judgement from Heaven with raging fire
          is ready to fall on this place and those that dwell
          therein.’</span> ”</span> The abbess said, <span class="tei tei-q">“Why did you not sooner reveal to me what you
          knew?”</span> He answered, <span class="tei tei-q">“I was afraid to
          do it, out of respect to you, lest you should be too much
          afflicted; yet you may have this comfort, that the blow will not
          fall in your days.”</span> This vision being made known, the
          inhabitants of that place were for a few days in some little fear,
          and leaving off their sins, began to do penance; but after the
          death of the abbess they returned to their former defilement, nay,
          they committed worse sins; and when they said <span class="tei tei-q">“Peace and safety,”</span> the doom of the aforesaid
          judgement came suddenly upon them.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">That all this
          fell out after this manner, was told me by my most reverend
          fellow-priest, Aedgils, who then lived in that monastery.
          Afterwards, when many of the inhabitants had departed thence, on
          account of the destruction, he lived a long time in our
          monastery,<a href="#note_719" id="noteref_719" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">719</span></span></a> and
          died there. We have thought fit to insert this in our History, to
          admonish the reader of the works of the Lord, how terrible He is in
          His doing toward the children of men, lest haply we should at some
          time or other yield to the snares of the flesh, and dreading too
          little the judgement of God, fall under His sudden wrath, and
          either in His righteous anger be brought low with temporal losses,
          or else be more strictly tried and snatched away to eternal
          perdition.</p>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page285">[pg 285]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg285"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc237"/> <a id="pdf238"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_IV_Chap_XXVI"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XXVI. Of the death of the Kings
          Egfrid and Hlothere. [684-685</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year of
          our Lord 684, Egfrid, king of the Northumbrians, sending his
          general, Berct,<a href="#note_720" id="noteref_720" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">720</span></span></a> with
          an army into Ireland, miserably laid waste that unoffending nation,
          which had always been most friendly to the English; insomuch that
          the invading force spared not even the churches or monasteries. But
          the islanders, while to the utmost of their power they repelled
          force with force, implored the assistance of the Divine mercy, and
          with constant imprecations invoked the vengeance of Heaven; and
          though such as curse cannot inherit the kingdom of God, yet it was
          believed, that those who were justly cursed on account of their
          impiety, soon suffered the penalty of their guilt at the avenging
          hand of God. For the very next year, when that same king had rashly
          led his army to ravage the province of the Picts,<a href="#note_721" id="noteref_721" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">721</span></span></a>
          greatly against the advice of his friends, and particularly of
          Cuthbert,<a href="#note_722" id="noteref_722" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">722</span></span></a> of
          blessed memory, who had been lately ordained bishop, the enemy made
          a feigned retreat, and the king was drawn into a narrow pass among
          remote mountains,<a href="#note_723" id="noteref_723" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">723</span></span></a> and
          slain, with the greater part of the forces he had led thither, on
          the 20th of May, in the fortieth year of his age, and the fifteenth
          of his reign.<a href="#note_724" id="noteref_724" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">724</span></span></a> His
          friends, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page286">[pg
          286]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg286"/>
          as has been said, advised him not to engage in this war; but since
          he had the year before refused to listen to the most reverend
          father, Egbert,<a href="#note_725" id="noteref_725" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">725</span></span></a>
          advising him not to attack the Scots, who were doing him no harm,
          it was laid upon him as a punishment for his sin, that he should
          now not listen to those who would have prevented his death.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">From that time
          the hopes and strength of the Anglian kingdom <span class="tei tei-q">“began to ebb and fall away;”</span><a href="#note_726" id="noteref_726" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">726</span></span></a> for
          the Picts recovered their own lands, which had been held by the
          English, and so did also the Scots that were in Britain; and some
          of the Britons<a href="#note_727" id="noteref_727" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">727</span></span></a>
          regained their liberty, which they have now enjoyed for about
          forty-six years. Among the many English that then either fell by
          the sword, or were made slaves, or escaped by flight out of the
          country of the Picts, the most reverend man of God, Trumwine,<a href="#note_728" id="noteref_728" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">728</span></span></a> who
          had been made bishop over them, withdrew with his people that were
          in the monastery of Aebbercurnig,<a href="#note_729" id="noteref_729" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">729</span></span></a> in
          the country of the English, but close by the arm of the sea which
          is the boundary between the lands of the English and the Picts.
          Having commended his followers, wheresoever he could, to his
          friends in the monasteries, he chose his own place of abode in the
          monastery, which we have so often mentioned, of servants and
          handmaids of God, at Streanaeshalch;<a href="#note_730" id="noteref_730" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">730</span></span></a> and
          there for many years, with a few of his own brethren, he led a life
          in all monastic austerity, not only to his own benefit, but to the
          benefit of many others, and dying there, he was buried in the
          church of the blessed Peter the Apostle,<a href="#note_731" id="noteref_731" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">731</span></span></a> with
          the honour due to his life and rank. The royal virgin,
          Elfled,<a href="#note_732" id="noteref_732" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">732</span></span></a> with
          her mother, Eanfled, whom we have mentioned before, then presided
          over that monastery; but when the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page287">[pg 287]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg287"/> bishop came thither, that devout teacher
          found in him the greatest help in governing, and comfort in her
          private life. Aldfrid<a href="#note_733" id="noteref_733" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">733</span></span></a>
          succeeded Egfrid in the throne, being a man most learned in the
          Scriptures, said to be brother to Egfrid, and son to King Oswy; he
          nobly retrieved the ruined state of the kingdom, though within
          narrower bounds.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The same year,
          being the 685th from the Incarnation of our Lord, Hlothere,<a href="#note_734" id="noteref_734" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">734</span></span></a> king
          of Kent, died on the 6th of February, when he had reigned twelve
          years after his brother Egbert,<a href="#note_735" id="noteref_735" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">735</span></span></a> who
          had reigned nine years: he was wounded in battle with the South
          Saxons, whom Edric,<a href="#note_736" id="noteref_736" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">736</span></span></a> the
          son of Egbert, had raised against him, and died whilst his wound
          was being dressed. After him, this same Edric reigned a year and a
          half. On his death, kings of doubtful title, or of foreign
          origin,<a href="#note_737" id="noteref_737" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">737</span></span></a> for
          some time wasted the kingdom, till the lawful king, Wictred,<a href="#note_738" id="noteref_738" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">738</span></span></a> the
          son of Egbert, being settled in the throne, by his piety and zeal
          delivered his nation from foreign invasion.</p>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page288">[pg 288]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg288"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc239"/> <a id="pdf240"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_IV_Chap_XXVII"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XXVII. How Cuthbert, a man of
          God, was made bishop; and how he lived and taught whilst still in
          the monastic life. [685</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the same year
          in which King Egfrid departed this life,<a href="#note_739" id="noteref_739" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">739</span></span></a> he,
          as has been said, caused the holy and venerable Cuthbert<a href="#note_740" id="noteref_740" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">740</span></span></a> to be
          ordained bishop of the church of Lindisfarne. He had for many years
          led a solitary life, in great continence of body and mind, in a
          very small island, called Farne,<a href="#note_741" id="noteref_741" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">741</span></span></a> in
          the ocean about nine miles distant from that same church. From his
          earliest childhood<a href="#note_742" id="noteref_742" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">742</span></span></a> he
          had always been inflamed with the desire of a religious life; and
          he adopted the name and habit of a monk when he was quite a young
          man: he first entered the monastery of Mailros,<a href="#note_743" id="noteref_743" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">743</span></span></a> which
          is on the bank of the river Tweed, and was then governed by the
          Abbot Eata,<a href="#note_744" id="noteref_744" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">744</span></span></a> a man
          of great gentleness and simplicity, who was afterward made bishop
          of the church of Hagustald or Lindisfarne,<a href="#note_745" id="noteref_745" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">745</span></span></a> as
          has been said above. The provost of the monastery at that time was
          Boisil,<a href="#note_746" id="noteref_746" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">746</span></span></a> a
          priest of great virtue and of a prophetic spirit. Cuthbert, humbly
          submitting himself <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page289">[pg
          289]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg289"/>
          to this man's direction, from him received both a knowledge of the
          Scriptures, and an example of good works.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">After he had
          departed to the Lord, Cuthbert became provost of that monastery,
          where he instructed many in the rule of monastic life, both by the
          authority of a master, and the example of his own behaviour. Nor
          did he bestow his teaching and his example in the monastic life on
          his monastery alone, but laboured far and wide to convert the
          people dwelling round about from the life of foolish custom, to the
          love of heavenly joys; for many profaned the faith which they held
          by their wicked actions; and some also, in the time of a
          pestilence, neglecting the mysteries of the faith which they had
          received, had recourse to the false remedies of idolatry, as if
          they could have put a stop to the plague sent from God, by
          incantations, amulets, or any other secrets of the Devil's art. In
          order to correct the error of both sorts, he often went forth from
          the monastery, sometimes on horseback, but oftener on foot, and
          went to the neighbouring townships, where he preached the way of
          truth to such as had gone astray; which Boisil also in his time had
          been wont to do. It was then the custom of the English people, that
          when a clerk or priest came to a township, they all, at his
          summons, flocked together to hear the Word; willingly heard what
          was said, and still more willingly practised those things that they
          could hear and understand. And such was Cuthbert's skill in
          speaking, so keen his desire to persuade men of what he taught,
          such a light shone in his angelic face, that no man present dared
          to conceal from him the secrets of his heart, but all openly
          revealed in confession what they had done, thinking doubtless that
          their guilt could in nowise be hidden from him; and having
          confessed their sins, they wiped them out by fruits worthy of
          repentance, as he bade them. He was wont chiefly to resort to those
          places and preach in those villages which were situated afar off
          amid steep and wild mountains, so that others dreaded to go
          thither, and whereof the poverty and barbarity rendered them
          inaccessible to other teachers. But he, devoting himself entirely
          to that pious labour, so industriously ministered <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page290">[pg 290]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg290"/> to them with his wise teaching, that
          when he went forth from the monastery, he would often stay a whole
          week, sometimes two or three, or even sometimes a full month,
          before he returned home, continuing among the hill folk to call
          that simple people by his preaching and good works to the things of
          Heaven.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">This venerable
          servant of the Lord, having thus spent many years in the monastery
          of Mailros, and there become conspicuous by great tokens of virtue,
          his most reverend abbot, Eata, removed him to the isle of
          Lindisfarne, that he might there also, by his authority as provost
          and by the example of his own practice, instruct the brethren in
          the observance of regular discipline; for the same reverend father
          then governed that place also as abbot. From ancient times, the
          bishop was wont to reside there with his clergy, and the abbot with
          his monks, who were likewise under the paternal care of the bishop;
          because Aidan, who was the first bishop of the place, being himself
          a monk, brought monks thither, and settled the monastic institution
          there;<a href="#note_747" id="noteref_747" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">747</span></span></a> as
          the blessed Father Augustine is known to have done before in Kent,
          when the most reverend Pope Gregory wrote to him, as has been said
          above, to this effect: <span class="tei tei-q">“But in that you, my
          brother, having been instructed in monastic rules, must not live
          apart from your clergy in the Church of the English, which has been
          lately, by the will of God, converted to the faith, you must
          establish the manner of conversation of our fathers in the
          primitive Church, among whom, none said that aught of the things
          which they possessed was his own; but they had all things
          common.”</span><a href="#note_748" id="noteref_748" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">748</span></span></a></p>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page291">[pg 291]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg291"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc241"/> <a id="pdf242"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_IV_Chap_XXVIII"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XXVIII. How the same St.
          Cuthbert, living the life of an Anchorite, by his prayers obtained
          a spring in a dry soil, and had a crop from seed sown by the labour
          of his hands out of season. [676</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">After this,
          Cuthbert, as he grew in goodness and intensity of devotion,
          attained also to a hermit's life of contemplation in silence and
          solitude, as we have mentioned. But forasmuch as many years ago we
          wrote enough concerning his life and virtues, both in heroic verse
          and prose,<a href="#note_749" id="noteref_749" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">749</span></span></a> it
          may suffice at present only to mention this, that when he was about
          to go to the island, he declared to the brothers, <span class="tei tei-q">“If by the grace of God it shall be granted to me, that
          I may live in that place by the labour of my hands, I will
          willingly abide there; but if not, God willing, I will very soon
          return to you.”</span> The place was quite destitute of water,
          corn, and trees; and being infested by evil spirits, was very ill
          suited for human habitation; but it became in all respects
          habitable, at the desire of the man of God; for at his coming the
          wicked spirits departed. When, after expelling the enemy, he had,
          with the help of the brethren, built himself a narrow dwelling,
          with a mound about it, and the necessary cells in it, to wit, an
          oratory and a common living room, he ordered the brothers to dig a
          pit in the floor of the room, although the ground was hard and
          stony, and no hopes appeared of any spring. When they had done this
          relying upon the faith and prayers of the servant of God, the next
          day it was found to be full of water, and to this day affords
          abundance of its heavenly bounty to all that resort thither. He
          also desired that instruments for husbandry might be brought him,
          and some wheat; but having prepared the ground and sown the wheat
          at the proper season, no sign of a blade, not to speak of ears, had
          sprouted from it by the summer. Hereupon, when the brethren visited
          him according to custom, he ordered barley to be brought him, if
          haply it <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page292">[pg
          292]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg292"/>
          were either the nature of the soil, or the will of God, the Giver
          of all things, that such grain rather should grow there. He sowed
          it in the same field, when it was brought him, after the proper
          time of sowing, and therefore without any likelihood of its bearing
          fruit; but a plentiful crop immediately sprang up, and afforded the
          man of God the means which he had desired of supporting himself by
          his own labour.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">When he had here
          served God in solitude many years, the mound which encompassed his
          dwelling being so high, that he could see nothing from it but
          heaven, which he thirsted to enter, it happened that a great synod
          was assembled in the presence of King Egfrid, near the river Alne,
          at a place called Adtuifyrdi,<a href="#note_750" id="noteref_750" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">750</span></span></a> which
          signifies <span class="tei tei-q">“at the two fords,”</span> in
          which Archbishop Theodore, of blessed memory, presided, and there
          Cuthbert was, with one mind and consent of all, chosen bishop of
          the church of Lindisfarne. They could not, however, draw him from
          his hermitage, though many messengers and letters were sent to him.
          At last the aforesaid king himself, with the most holy Bishop
          Trumwine,<a href="#note_751" id="noteref_751" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">751</span></span></a> and
          other religious and powerful men, sailed to the island; many also
          of the brothers from the isle of Lindisfarne itself, assembled
          together for the same purpose: they all knelt, and conjured him by
          the Lord, with tears and entreaties, till they drew him, also in
          tears, from his beloved retreat, and forced him to go to the synod.
          When he arrived there, he was very reluctantly overcome by the
          unanimous resolution of all present, and compelled to take upon
          himself the duties of the episcopate; being chiefly prevailed upon
          by the words of Boisil, the servant of God, who, when he had
          prophetically<a href="#note_752" id="noteref_752" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">752</span></span></a>
          foretold all things that were to befall him, had also predicted
          that he should be a bishop. Nevertheless, the consecration was not
          appointed <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page293">[pg
          293]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg293"/>
          immediately; but when the winter, which was then at hand, was over,
          it was carried out at Easter,<a href="#note_753" id="noteref_753" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">753</span></span></a> in
          the city of York, and in the presence of the aforesaid King Egfrid;
          seven bishops coming together for his consecration, among whom,
          Theodore, of blessed memory, was Primate. He was first elected
          bishop of the church of Hagustald, in the place of Tunbert,<a href="#note_754" id="noteref_754" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">754</span></span></a> who
          had been deposed from the episcopate; but because he chose rather
          to be placed over the church of Lindisfarne, in which he had lived,
          it was thought fit that Eata should return to the see of the church
          of Hagustald, to which he had been first ordained, and that
          Cuthbert should take upon him the government of the church of
          Lindisfarne.<a href="#note_755" id="noteref_755" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">755</span></span></a></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Following the
          example of the blessed Apostles, he adorned the episcopal dignity
          by his virtuous deeds; for he both protected the people committed
          to his charge by constant prayer, and roused them, by wholesome
          admonitions, to thoughts of Heaven. He first showed in his own life
          what he taught others to do, a practice which greatly strengthens
          all teaching; for he was above all things inflamed with the fire of
          Divine charity, of sober mind and patient, most diligently intent
          on devout prayers, and kindly to all that came to him for comfort.
          He thought it stood in the stead of prayer to afford the weak
          brethren the help of his exhortation, knowing that he who said
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Thou shalt love the Lord thy God,”</span>
          said likewise, <span class="tei tei-q">“Thou shalt love thy
          neighbour.”</span> He was noted for penitential abstinence, and was
          always through the grace of compunction, intent upon heavenly
          things. And when he offered up to God the Sacrifice of the saving
          Victim, he commended his prayer to the Lord, not with uplifted
          voice, but with tears drawn from the bottom of his heart.</p>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page294">[pg 294]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg294"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc243"/> <a id="pdf244"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_IV_Chap_XXIX"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XXIX. How this bishop foretold
          that his own death was at hand to the anchorite Herebert.
          [687</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Having spent two
          years in his bishopric, he returned to his island and
          hermitage,<a href="#note_756" id="noteref_756" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">756</span></span></a> being
          warned of God that the day of his death, or rather of his entrance
          into that life which alone can be called life, was drawing near; as
          he, at that time, with his wonted candour, signified to certain
          persons, though in words which were somewhat obscure, but which
          were nevertheless afterwards plainly understood; while to others he
          declared the same openly.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">There was a
          certain priest, called Herebert, a man of holy life, who had long
          been united with the man of God, Cuthbert, in the bonds of
          spiritual friendship. This man leading a solitary life in the
          island of that great lake from which the river Derwent flows at its
          beginning,<a href="#note_757" id="noteref_757" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">757</span></span></a> was
          wont to visit him every year, and to receive from him the teaching
          of everlasting salvation. Hearing that Bishop Cuthbert was come to
          the city of Lugubalia,<a href="#note_758" id="noteref_758" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">758</span></span></a> he
          went thither to him, according to his custom, seeking to be more
          and more inflamed in heavenly desires through his wholesome
          admonitions. Whilst they alternately entertained one another with
          draughts of the celestial life, the bishop, among other things,
          said, <span class="tei tei-q">“Brother Herebert, remember at this
          time to ask me and speak to me concerning all whereof you have need
          to ask and speak; for, when we part, we shall never again see one
          another with bodily eyesight in this world. For I know of a surety
          that the time of my departure is at hand, and that shortly I must
          put off this my tabernacle.”</span> Hearing these words, Herebert
          fell down at his feet, with tears and lamentations, and said,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“I beseech you, by the Lord, not to forsake
          me; but to remember your most <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page295">[pg 295]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg295"/> faithful companion, and entreat the mercy of
          God that, as we have served Him together upon earth, so we may
          depart together to behold His grace in Heaven. For you know that I
          have always endeavoured to live according to the words of your
          lips, and likewise whatsoever faults I have committed, either
          through ignorance or frailty, I have instantly sought to amend
          according to the judgement of your will.”</span> The bishop applied
          himself to prayer, and having presently had intimation in the
          spirit that he had obtained what he asked of the Lord, he said,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Rise, brother, and do not weep, but
          rejoice greatly because the mercy of Heaven has granted what we
          desired.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The event
          established the truth of this promise and prophecy, for after their
          parting, they never again saw one another in the flesh; but their
          spirits quitting their bodies on one and the same day, to wit, the
          20th of March,<a href="#note_759" id="noteref_759" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">759</span></span></a> were
          immediately united in fellowship in the blessed vision, and
          together translated to the heavenly kingdom by the ministry of
          angels. But Herebert was first wasted by a long-continued
          infirmity, through the dispensation of the Lord's mercy, as may be
          believed, to the end that if he was in any wise inferior in merit
          to the blessed Cuthbert, that which was lacking might be supplied
          by the chastening pain of a long sickness, that being thus made
          equal in grace to his intercessor, as he departed out of the body
          at one and the same time with him, so he might be accounted worthy
          to be received into the like abode of eternal bliss.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The most
          reverend father died in the isle of Farne, earnestly entreating the
          brothers that he might also be buried there, where he had served no
          small time under the Lord's banner. But at length yielding to their
          entreaties, he consented to be carried back to the isle of
          Lindisfarne, and there buried in the church.<a href="#note_760" id="noteref_760" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">760</span></span></a> This
          being <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page296">[pg 296]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg296"/> done, the venerable
          Bishop Wilfrid held the episcopal see of that church one
          year,<a href="#note_761" id="noteref_761" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">761</span></span></a> till
          such time as a bishop should be chosen to be ordained in the room
          of Cuthbert. Afterwards Eadbert<a href="#note_762" id="noteref_762" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">762</span></span></a> was
          ordained, a man renowned for his knowledge of the Holy Scriptures,
          as also for his observance of the heavenly precepts, and chiefly
          for almsgiving, so that, according to the law, he gave every year
          the tenth part, not only of four-footed beasts, but also of all
          corn and fruit, as also of his garments, to the poor.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc245"/> <a id="pdf246"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_IV_Chap_XXX"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XXX. How his body was found
          altogether uncorrupted after it had been buried eleven years; and
          how his successor in the bishopric departed this world not long
          after. [698</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In order to show
          forth the great glory of the life after death of the man of God,
          Cuthbert, whereas the loftiness of his life before his death had
          been revealed by the testimony of many miracles, when he had been
          buried eleven years, Divine Providence put it into the minds of the
          brethren to take up his bones. They thought to find them dry and
          all the rest of the body consumed and turned to dust, after the
          manner of the dead, and they desired to put them into a new coffin,
          and to lay them in the same place, but above the pavement, for the
          honour due to him. They made known their resolve to Bishop Eadbert,
          and he consented to it, and bade them to be mindful to do it on the
          anniversary of his burial. They did so, and opening the grave,
          found all the body whole, as if he were still alive, and the joints
          of the limbs pliable, like one asleep rather than dead; besides,
          all the vestments in which he was clothed were not only undefiled,
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page297">[pg 297]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg297"/> but marvellous to
          behold, being fresh and bright as at the first. The brothers seeing
          this, were struck with a great dread, and hastened to tell the
          bishop what they had found; he being then alone in a place remote
          from the church, and encompassed on all sides by the shifting waves
          of the sea. There he always used to spend the time of Lent, and was
          wont to pass the forty days before the Nativity of our Lord, in
          great devotion with abstinence and prayer and tears. There also his
          venerable predecessor, Cuthbert, had for some time served as the
          soldier of the Lord in solitude before he went to the isle of
          Farne.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">They brought him
          also some part of the garments that had covered the holy body;
          which presents he thankfully accepted, and gladly heard of the
          miracles, and he kissed the garments even, with great affection, as
          if they had been still upon his father's body, and said,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Let new garments be put upon the body, in
          place of these you have brought, and so lay it in the coffin which
          you have prepared; for I know of a surety that the place will not
          long remain empty, which has been hallowed with so great grace of
          heavenly miracles; and how happy is he to whom the Lord, the Author
          and Giver of all bliss, shall vouchsafe to grant the privilege of
          resting therein.”</span> When the bishop had made an end of saying
          this and more in like manner, with many tears and great compunction
          and with faltering tongue, the brothers did as he had commanded
          them, and when they had wrapped the body in new garments, and laid
          it in a new coffin, they placed it above the pavement of the
          sanctuary. Soon after, Bishop Eadbert, beloved of God, fell
          grievously sick, and his fever daily increasing in severity, ere
          long, that is, on the 6th of May,<a href="#note_763" id="noteref_763" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">763</span></span></a> he
          also departed to the Lord, and they laid his body in the grave of
          the blessed father Cuthbert, placing over it the coffin, with the
          uncorrupted remains of that father. The miracles of healing,
          sometimes wrought in that place testify to the merits of them both;
          of some of these we <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page298">[pg
          298]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg298"/>
          have before preserved the memory in the book of his life. But in
          this History we have thought fit to add some others which have
          lately come to our knowledge.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc247"/> <a id="pdf248"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XXXI. Of one that was cured of
          a palsy at his tomb.</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">There was in
          that same monastery a brother whose name was Badudegn, who had for
          no small time ministered to the guests of the house, and is still
          living, having the testimony of all the brothers and strangers
          resorting thither, of being a man of much piety and religion, and
          serving the office put upon him only for the sake of the heavenly
          reward. This man, having one day washed in the sea the coverings or
          blankets which he used in the guest chamber, was returning home,
          when on the way, he was seized with a sudden infirmity, insomuch
          that he fell to the ground, and lay there a long time and could
          scarce at last rise again. When he got up, he felt one half of his
          body, from the head to the foot, struck with palsy, and with great
          trouble made his way home by the help of a staff. The disease
          increased by degrees, and as night approached, became still worse,
          so that when day returned, he could scarcely rise or walk alone.
          Suffering from this trouble, he conceived the wise resolve to go to
          the church, as best he could, and approach the tomb of the reverend
          father Cuthbert, and there, on his knees, humbly beseech the mercy
          of God that he might either be delivered from that disease, if it
          were well for him, or if by the grace of God it was ordained for
          him to be chastened longer by this affliction, that he might bear
          the pain which was laid upon him with patience and a quiet
          mind.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He did
          accordingly as he had determined, and supporting his weak limbs
          with a staff, entered the church. There prostrating himself before
          the body of the man of God, he prayed with pious earnestness, that,
          through his intercession, the Lord might be propitious to him. As
          he prayed, he seemed to fall into a deep sleep, and, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page299">[pg 299]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg299"/> as he was afterwards wont to relate,
          felt a large and broad hand touch his head, where the pain lay, and
          likewise pass over all that part of his body which had been
          benumbed by the disease, down to his feet. Gradually the pain
          departed and health returned. Then he awoke, and rose up in perfect
          health, and returning thanks to the Lord for his recovery, told the
          brothers what had been done for him; and to the joy of them all,
          returned the more zealously, as if chastened by the trial of his
          affliction, to the service which he was wont before to perform with
          care.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Moreover, the
          very garments which had been on Cuthbert's body, dedicated to God,
          either while he was alive, or after his death, were not without the
          virtue of healing, as may be seen in the book of his life and
          miracles, by such as shall read it.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc249"/> <a id="pdf250"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XXXII. Of one who was lately
          cured of a disease in his eye at the relics of St.
          Cuthbert.</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Nor is that cure
          to be passed over in silence, which was performed by his relics
          three years ago, and was told me lately by the brother himself, on
          whom it was wrought. It happened in the monastery, which, being
          built near the river Dacore,<a href="#note_764" id="noteref_764" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">764</span></span></a> has
          taken its name from the same, over which, at that time, the
          religious Suidbert<a href="#note_765" id="noteref_765" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">765</span></span></a>
          presided as abbot. In that monastery was a youth whose eyelid was
          disfigured by an unsightly tumour, which growing daily greater,
          threatened the loss of the eye. The physicians endeavoured to
          mitigate it by applying ointments, but in vain. Some said it ought
          to be cut off; others opposed this course, for fear of greater
          danger. The brother having long laboured under this malady, when no
          human means availed to save his eye, but rather, it grew daily
          worse, on a sudden, through the grace of the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page300">[pg 300]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg300"/> mercy of God, it came to pass that he
          was cured by the relics of the holy father, Cuthbert. For when the
          brethren found his body uncorrupted, after having been many years
          buried, they took some part of the hair, to give, as relics, to
          friends who asked for them, or to show, in testimony of the
          miracle.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">One of the
          priests of the monastery, named Thruidred, who is now abbot there,
          had a small part of these relics by him at that time. One day he
          went into the church and opened the box of relics, to give some
          part of them to a friend who asked for it, and it happened that the
          youth who had the diseased eye was then in the church. The priest,
          having given his friend as much as he thought fit, gave the rest to
          the youth to put back into its place. But he having received the
          hairs of the holy head, prompted by some salutary impulse, applied
          them to the diseased eyelid, and endeavoured for some time, by the
          application of them, to abate and mitigate the tumour. Having done
          this, he again laid the relics in the box, as he had been bidden,
          believing that his eye would soon be cured by the hairs of the man
          of God, which had touched it; nor did his faith disappoint him. It
          was then, as he is wont to relate, about the second hour of the
          day; but while he was occupied with other thoughts and business of
          the day, on a sudden, about the sixth hour of the same, touching
          his eye, he found it and the eyelid as sound as if there never had
          been any disfigurement or tumour on it.</p>
</div>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page301">[pg 301]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg301"/>
<hr class="page"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 5.00em; margin-top: 5.00em">
<a id="toc251"/> <a id="pdf252"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_V"/>
<h1 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 3.46em; margin-top: 3.46em">
<span style="font-size: 173%">Book V</span></h1>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc253"/> <a id="pdf254"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_V_Chap_I"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. I. How Ethelwald, successor to
          Cuthbert, leading a hermit's life, calmed a tempest by his prayers
          when the brethren were in danger at sea. [687-699</span>
<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The venerable
          Ethelwald<a href="#note_766" id="noteref_766" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">766</span></span></a>
          succeeded the man of God, Cuthbert, in the exercise of a solitary
          life, which he spent in the isle of Farne<a href="#note_767" id="noteref_767" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">767</span></span></a>
          before he became a bishop. After he had received the priesthood, he
          consecrated his office by deeds worthy of that degree for many
          years in the monastery which is called Inhrypum.<a href="#note_768" id="noteref_768" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">768</span></span></a> To
          the end that his merit and manner of life may be the more certainly
          made known, I will relate one miracle of his, which was told me by
          one of the brothers for and on whom the same was wrought; to wit,
          Guthfrid, the venerable servant and priest of Christ, who also,
          afterwards, as abbot, presided over the brethren of the same church
          of Lindisfarne, in which he was educated.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I came,”</span> says he, <span class="tei tei-q">“to
          the island of Farne, with two others of the brethren, desiring to
          speak with the most reverend father, Ethelwald. Having been
          refreshed with his discourse, and asked for his blessing, as we
          were returning home, behold on a sudden, when we were in the midst
          of the sea, the fair weather in which we were sailing, was broken,
          and there arose so great and terrible a tempest, that neither sails
          nor oars were of any use to us, nor had we anything to expect but
          death. After long struggling with the wind and waves to no effect,
          at last we looked back to see whether it was possible by any means
          at least to return to the island whence we came, but we found that
          we were on all sides alike cut off by the storm, and that there was
          no hope of escape by our own <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page302">[pg 302]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg302"/> efforts. But looking further, we perceived,
          on the island of Farne, our father Ethelwald, beloved of God, come
          out of his retreat to watch our course; for, hearing the noise of
          the tempest and raging sea, he had come forth to see what would
          become of us. When he beheld us in distress and despair, he bowed
          his knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, in prayer for our
          life and safety; and as he finished his prayer, he calmed the
          swelling water, in such sort that the fierceness of the storm
          ceased on all sides, and fair winds attended us over a smooth sea
          to the very shore. When we had landed, and had pulled up our small
          vessel from the waves, the storm, which had ceased a short time for
          our sake, presently returned, and raged furiously during the whole
          day; so that it plainly appeared that the brief interval of calm
          had been granted by Heaven in answer to the prayers of the man of
          God, to the end that we might escape.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The man of God
          remained in the isle of Farne twelve years, and died there; but was
          buried in the church of the blessed Apostle Peter, in the isle of
          Lindisfarne, beside the bodies of the aforesaid bishops.<a href="#note_769" id="noteref_769" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">769</span></span></a> These
          things happened in the days of King Aldfrid,<a href="#note_770" id="noteref_770" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">770</span></span></a> who,
          after his brother Egfrid, ruled the nation of the Northumbrians for
          nineteen years.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc255"/> <a id="pdf256"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_V_Chap_II"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. II. How Bishop John cured a
          dumb man by his blessing. [687</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the beginning
          of Aldfrid's reign, Bishop Eata<a href="#note_771" id="noteref_771" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">771</span></span></a> died,
          and was succeeded in the bishopric of the church of Hagustald by
          the holy man John,<a href="#note_772" id="noteref_772" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">772</span></span></a> of
          whom those that knew him well are wont to tell many miracles, and
          more particularly Berthun,<a href="#note_773" id="noteref_773" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">773</span></span></a> a man
          worthy of all reverence and <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page303">[pg 303]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg303"/> of undoubted truthfulness, and once his
          deacon, now abbot of the monastery called Inderauuda,<a href="#note_774" id="noteref_774" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">774</span></span></a> that
          is, <span class="tei tei-q">“In the wood of the Deiri”</span>: some
          of which miracles we have thought fit to hand on to posterity.
          There is a certain remote dwelling<a href="#note_775" id="noteref_775" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">775</span></span></a>
          enclosed by a mound, among scattered trees, not far from the church
          of Hagustald, being about a mile and a half distant and separated
          from it by the river Tyne, having an oratory<a href="#note_776" id="noteref_776" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">776</span></span></a>
          dedicated to St. Michael the Archangel, where the man of God used
          frequently, as occasion offered, and specially in Lent, to abide
          with a few companions and in quiet give himself to prayer and
          study. Having come hither once at the beginning of Lent to stay, he
          bade his followers find out some poor man labouring under any
          grievous infirmity, or want, whom they might keep with them during
          those days, to receive alms, for so he was always used to do.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">There was in a
          township not far off, a certain youth who was dumb, known to the
          bishop, for he often used to come into his presence to receive
          alms. He had never been able to speak one word; besides, he had so
          much scurf and scab on his head, that no hair could ever grow on
          the top of it, but only some rough hairs stood on end round about
          it. The bishop caused this young man to be brought, and a little
          hut to be made for him within the enclosure of the dwelling, in
          which he might abide, and receive alms from him every day. When one
          week of Lent was over, the next Sunday he bade the poor
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page304">[pg 304]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg304"/> man come to him, and
          when he had come, he bade him put his tongue out of his mouth and
          show it him; then taking him by the chin, he made the sign of the
          Holy Cross on his tongue, directing him to draw it back so signed
          into his mouth and to speak. <span class="tei tei-q">“Pronounce
          some word,”</span> said he; <span class="tei tei-q">“say
          <span class="tei tei-q">‘gae,’</span> ”</span> which, in the
          language of the English, is the word of affirming and consenting,
          that is, yes. The youth's tongue was immediately loosed, and he
          spoke as he was bidden. The bishop then added the names of the
          letters: <span class="tei tei-q">“Say A.”</span> He said A.
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Say B;”</span> he said B also. When he had
          repeated all the letters after the bishop, the latter proceeded to
          put syllables and words to him, and when he had repeated them all
          rightly he bade him utter whole sentences, and he did it. Nor did
          he cease all that day and the next night, as long as he could keep
          awake, as those who were present relate, to say something, and to
          express his private thoughts and wishes to others, which he could
          never do before; after the manner of the man long lame, who, when
          he was healed by the Apostles Peter and John,<a href="#note_777" id="noteref_777" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">777</span></span></a>
          leaping up, stood and walked, and entered with them into the
          temple, walking, and leaping, and praising the Lord, rejoicing to
          have the use of his feet, which he had so long lacked. The bishop,
          rejoicing with him at his cure, caused the physician to take in
          hand the healing of the sores of his head. He did as he was bidden,
          and with the help of the bishop's blessing and prayers, a goodly
          head of hair grew as the skin was healed. Thus the youth became
          fair of countenance, ready of speech, with hair curling in comely
          fashion, whereas before he had been ill-favoured, miserable, and
          dumb. Thus filled with joy at his recovered health, notwithstanding
          that the bishop offered to keep him in his own household, he chose
          rather to return home.</p>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page305">[pg 305]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg305"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc257"/> <a id="pdf258"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_V_Chap_III"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. III. How he healed a sick
          maiden by his prayers. [705</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The same Berthun
          told another miracle concerning the said bishop. When the most
          reverend Wilfrid, after a long banishment, was admitted to the
          bishopric of the church of Hagustald,<a href="#note_778" id="noteref_778" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">778</span></span></a> and
          the aforesaid John, upon the death of Bosa,<a href="#note_779" id="noteref_779" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">779</span></span></a> a man
          of great sanctity and humility, was, in his place, appointed bishop
          of York, he himself came, once upon a time, to the monastery of
          nuns, at the place called Wetadun,<a href="#note_780" id="noteref_780" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">780</span></span></a> where
          the Abbess Heriburg then presided. <span class="tei tei-q">“When we
          were come thither,”</span> said he, <span class="tei tei-q">“and
          had been received with great and universal joy, the abbess told us,
          that one of the nuns, who was her own daughter after the flesh,
          laboured under a grievous sickness, for she had been lately let
          blood in the arm, and whilst she was under treatment,<a href="#note_781" id="noteref_781" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">781</span></span></a> was
          seized with an attack of sudden pain, which speedily increased,
          while the wounded arm became worse, and so much swollen, that it
          could scarce be compassed with both hands; and she lay in bed like
          to die through excess of pain. Wherefore the abbess entreated the
          bishop that he would vouchsafe to go in and give her his blessing;
          for she believed that she would soon be better if he blessed her or
          laid his hands upon her. He asked when the maiden had been let
          blood, and being told that it was on the fourth day of the moon,
          said, <span class="tei tei-q">‘You did very indiscreetly and
          unskilfully to let blood on the fourth day of the moon; for I
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page306">[pg 306]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg306"/> remember that
          Archbishop Theodore,<a href="#note_782" id="noteref_782" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">782</span></span></a> of
          blessed memory, said, that blood-letting at that time was very
          dangerous, when the light of the moon is waxing and the tide of the
          ocean is rising. And what can I do for the maiden if she is like to
          die?’</span></span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But the abbess still earnestly entreated for her
          daughter, whom she dearly loved, and designed to make abbess in her
          stead,<a href="#note_783" id="noteref_783" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">783</span></span></a> and
          at last prevailed with him to go in and visit the sick maiden.
          Wherefore he went in, taking me with him to the maid, who lay, as I
          said, in sore anguish, and her arm swelling so greatly that it
          could not be bent at all at the elbow; and he stood and said a
          prayer over her, and having given his blessing, went out.
          Afterwards, as we were sitting at table, at the usual hour, some
          one came in and called me out, saying, <span class="tei tei-q">‘Quoenburg’</span> (that was the maid's name)
          <span class="tei tei-q">‘desires that you should immediately go
          back to her.’</span> This I did, and entering the chamber, I found
          her of more cheerful countenance, and like one in good health. And
          while I was sitting beside her, she said, <span class="tei tei-q">‘Shall we call for something to
          drink?’</span>—<span class="tei tei-q">‘Yes,’</span> said I,
          <span class="tei tei-q">‘and right glad am I, if you can.’</span>
          When the cup was brought, and we had both drunk, she said,
          <span class="tei tei-q">‘As soon as the bishop had said the prayer
          for me and given me his blessing and had gone out, I immediately
          began to mend; and though I have not yet recovered my former
          strength, yet all the pain is quite gone both from my arm, where it
          was most burning, and from all my body, as if the bishop had
          carried it away with him; notwithstanding the swelling of the arm
          still seems to remain.’</span> But when we departed thence, the
          cure of the pain in her limbs was followed by the assuaging of the
          grievous swelling; and the maiden <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page307">[pg 307]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg307"/> being thus delivered from pains and death,
          returned praise to our Lord and Saviour, in company with His other
          servants who were there.”</span></p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc259"/> <a id="pdf260"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. IV. How he healed a thegn's
          wife that was sick, with holy water.</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The same abbot
          related another miracle, not unlike the former, of the aforesaid
          bishop. <span class="tei tei-q">“Not very far from our
          monastery,”</span> he said, <span class="tei tei-q">“to wit, about
          two miles off, was the township<a href="#note_784" id="noteref_784" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">784</span></span></a> of
          one Puch, a thegn, whose wife had lain sick of a very grievous
          disease for nearly forty days, insomuch that for three weeks she
          could not be carried out of the chamber where she lay. It happened
          that the man of God was, at that time, called thither by the thegn
          to consecrate a church; and when that was done, the thegn desired
          him to come into his house and dine. The bishop declined, saying
          that he must return to the monastery, which was very near. The
          thegn, entreating him more earnestly, vowed he would also give alms
          to the poor, if so be that the bishop would vouchsafe to enter his
          house that day and break his fast. I joined my entreaties to his,
          promising in like manner to give alms for the relief of the
          poor,<a href="#note_785" id="noteref_785" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">785</span></span></a> if he
          would but go and dine at the thegn's house, and give his blessing.
          Having at length, with much difficulty, prevailed, we went in to
          refresh ourselves. The bishop had sent to the woman that lay sick
          some of the holy water, which he had blessed for the consecration
          of the church, by one of the brothers who had come with me,
          ordering him to give her some to drink, and wash that part of her
          where he found that her pain was greatest, with some of the same
          water. This being done, the woman immediately got up whole and
          sound, and perceiving that she had not only been delivered from her
          long sickness, but at the same time had recovered the strength
          which she had lost for <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page308">[pg
          308]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg308"/>
          so great a time, she presented the cup to the bishop and to us, and
          continued serving us with meat and drink as she had begun, till
          dinner was over; following the example of the blessed Peter's
          wife's mother, who, having been sick of a fever, arose at the touch
          of our Lord's hand, and having forthwith received health and
          strength, ministered to them.”</span><a href="#note_786" id="noteref_786" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">786</span></span></a></p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc261"/> <a id="pdf262"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. V. How he likewise recalled by
          his prayers a thegn's servant from death.</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At another time
          also, being called to consecrate the church<a href="#note_787" id="noteref_787" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">787</span></span></a> of a
          thegn named Addi, when he had performed the required duty, he was
          entreated by the thegn to go in to one of his servants, who lay
          dangerously ill, insomuch that having lost all use of his limbs, he
          seemed to be at the point of death; and moreover the coffin had
          been made ready wherein to bury him after his death. The thegn
          urged his entreaties with tears, earnestly beseeching him that he
          would go in and pray for the servant, because his life was of great
          moment to him; and he believed that if the bishop would lay his
          hand upon him and give him his blessing, he would soon mend. So the
          bishop went in, and saw him very near death, and by his side the
          coffin in which he was to be laid for his burial, whilst all
          mourned. He said a prayer and blessed him, and going out, spake the
          wonted words of comfort, <span class="tei tei-q">“Good health be
          yours and that speedily.”</span> Afterwards, when they were sitting
          at table, the servant sent to his lord, desiring that he would let
          him have a cup of wine, because he was thirsty. The thegn,
          rejoicing greatly that he could drink, sent him a cup of wine,
          blessed by the bishop; and, as soon as he had drunk it, he
          immediately got up, and, shaking off the heaviness of his
          infirmity, dressed himself and went forth, and going in to the
          bishop, saluted him and the other guests, saying <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page309">[pg 309]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg309"/> that he also would gladly eat and drink
          with them. They bade him sit down with them at table, greatly
          rejoicing at his recovery. He sat down, ate and drank and made
          merry, and behaved himself like the rest of the company; and living
          many years after, continued in the same health which he had gained.
          The aforesaid abbot says this miracle was not wrought in his
          presence, but that he had it from those who were present.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc263"/> <a id="pdf264"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_V_Chap_VI"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. VI. How, both by his prayers
          and blessing, he recalled from death one of his clerks, who had
          bruised himself by a fall.</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Nor do I think
          that this miracle, which Herebald,<a href="#note_788" id="noteref_788" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">788</span></span></a> the
          servant of Christ, says was wrought upon himself by the bishop, is
          to be passed over in silence. He was then one of that bishop's
          clergy, but now presides as abbot in the monastery at the mouth of
          the river Tyne.<a href="#note_789" id="noteref_789" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">789</span></span></a>
<span class="tei tei-q">“Living with him,”</span> said he,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“and being very well acquainted with his
          course of life, I found it to be in all points worthy of a bishop,
          as far as it is lawful for men to judge; but I have known by the
          experience of others, and more particularly by my own, how great
          his merit was before Him Who seeth the heart; having been by his
          prayer and blessing recalled from the threshold of death and
          brought back to the way of life. For, when in the prime of my
          youth, I lived among his clergy, applying myself to reading and
          singing, but not having yet altogether withdrawn my heart from
          youthful pleasures, it happened one day that, as we were travelling
          with him, we came into a plain and open road, well fitted for
          galloping. The young men that were with him, and especially the
          laymen, began to entreat the bishop to give them leave to gallop,
          and make trial of their <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page310">[pg
          310]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg310"/>
          horses one with another. He at first refused, saying that it was an
          idle request; but at last, overcome by the unanimous desire of so
          many, <span class="tei tei-q">‘Do so,’</span> said he, <span class="tei tei-q">‘if you will, but let Herebald have no part in the
          trial.’</span> Then I earnestly prayed that I might have leave to
          compete with the rest, for I relied on an excellent horse, which he
          had himself given me, but I could in no wise obtain my
          request.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“When they had several times galloped backwards and
          forwards, the bishop and I looking on, my wanton humour prevailed,
          and I could no longer refrain, but though he forbade me, I struck
          in among them at their sport, and began to ride with them at full
          speed; whereat I heard him call after me with a groan, <span class="tei tei-q">‘Alas! how much you grieve me by riding after that
          manner.’</span> Though I heard him, I went on against his command;
          but immediately the fiery horse taking a great leap over a hollow
          place in the way, I fell, and at once lost all sense and motion,
          like one dying; for there was in that place a stone, level with the
          ground, covered with only a thin coating of turf, and no other
          stone was to be found in all that expanse of plain; and it happened
          by chance, or rather by Divine Providence so ordering it, to punish
          my disobedience, that my head and my hand, which in falling I had
          put under my head, struck upon that stone, so that my thumb was
          broken and my skull fractured, and I became, as I said, like one
          dead.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And because I could not move, they stretched a tent
          there for me to lie in. It was about the seventh hour of the day,
          and having lain still and as it were dead from that time till the
          evening, I then revived a little, and was carried home by my
          companions, and lay speechless all the night, vomiting blood,
          because something was broken within me by the fall. The bishop was
          very much grieved at my fall and my misfortune, for he bore me
          extraordinary affection. Nor would he stay that night, as he was
          wont, among his clergy; but spent it alone in watching and prayer,
          imploring the Divine goodness, as I suppose, for my preservation.
          Coming to me early in the morning, and having said a prayer over
          me, he <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page311">[pg
          311]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg311"/>
          called me by my name, and when I awoke as it were out of a heavy
          sleep, he asked whether I knew who it was that spoke to me? I
          opened my eyes and said, <span class="tei tei-q">‘Yes; you are my
          beloved bishop.’</span>—<span class="tei tei-q">‘Can you
          live?’</span> said he. I answered, <span class="tei tei-q">‘I can,
          through your prayers, if the Lord will.’</span></span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“He then laid his hand on my head, with the words of
          blessing, and returned to prayer; when he came again to see me, in
          a short time, he found me sitting and able to talk; and, being
          moved by Divine inspiration, as it soon appeared, began to ask me,
          whether I knew for certain that I had been baptized? I answered
          that I knew beyond all doubt that I had been washed in the font of
          salvation, for the remission of sins, and I named the priest by
          whom I knew that I had been baptized. He replied, <span class="tei tei-q">‘If you were baptized by that priest, your baptism is
          not perfect; for I know him, and that when he was ordained priest,
          he could in no wise, by reason of the dulness of his understanding,
          learn the ministry of catechizing and baptizing; for which reason I
          enjoined upon him altogether to desist from presuming to exercise
          that ministry, which he could not duly perform.’</span> This said,
          he set himself to catechize me that same hour; and it came to pass
          that when he breathed on my face,<a href="#note_790" id="noteref_790" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">790</span></span></a>
          straightway I felt better. He called the surgeon and ordered him to
          set and bind up my skull where it was fractured; and presently
          having received his blessing, I was so much better that I mounted
          on horseback the next day, and travelled with him to another place;
          and being soon after perfectly recovered, I was washed in the water
          of life.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He continued in
          his bishopric thirty-three years,<a href="#note_791" id="noteref_791" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">791</span></span></a> and
          then ascending to the heavenly kingdom, was buried in <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page312">[pg 312]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg312"/> St. Peter's Chapel, in his own
          monastery, which is called, <span class="tei tei-q">“In the wood of
          the Deiri,”</span><a href="#note_792" id="noteref_792" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">792</span></span></a> in
          the year of our Lord 721. For having, by his great age, become
          unable to govern his bishopric, he ordained Wilfrid,<a href="#note_793" id="noteref_793" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">793</span></span></a> his
          priest, bishop of the church of York, and retired to the aforesaid
          monastery, and there ended his days in godly conversation.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc265"/> <a id="pdf266"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_V_Chap_VII"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. VII. How Caedwalla, king of the
          West Saxons, went to Rome to be baptized; and his successor Ini,
          also devoutly journeyed to the same threshold of the holy Apostles.
          [688</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the third
          year of the reign of Aldfrid,<a href="#note_794" id="noteref_794" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">794</span></span></a>
          Caedwalla, king of the West Saxons, having most vigorously governed
          his nation for two years, quitted his crown for the sake of the
          Lord and an everlasting kingdom, and went to Rome, being desirous
          to obtain the peculiar honour of being cleansed in the baptismal
          font at the threshold of the blessed Apostles, for he had learned
          that in Baptism alone the entrance into the heavenly life is opened
          to mankind; and he hoped at the same time, that being made clean by
          Baptism, he should soon be freed from the bonds of the flesh and
          pass to the eternal joys of Heaven; both which things, by the help
          of the Lord, came to pass according as he had conceived in his
          mind. For coming to Rome, at the time that Sergius<a href="#note_795" id="noteref_795" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">795</span></span></a> was
          pope, he was baptized on the Holy Saturday before Easter Day,<a href="#note_796" id="noteref_796" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">796</span></span></a> in
          the year of our Lord 689, and being still in his white
          garments,<a href="#note_797" id="noteref_797" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">797</span></span></a> he
          fell sick, and was set free from the bonds of the flesh on the 20th
          of April, and obtained an entrance into the kingdom of the blessed
          in Heaven. At his baptism, the aforesaid pope had given him the
          name of Peter, to the end, that he might be also united in name to
          the most blessed chief of the Apostles, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page313">[pg 313]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg313"/> to whose most holy body his pious love had
          led him from the utmost bounds of the earth. He was likewise buried
          in his church, and by the pope's command an epitaph<a href="#note_798" id="noteref_798" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">798</span></span></a> was
          written on his tomb, wherein the memory of his devotion might be
          preserved for ever, and the readers or hearers thereof might be
          stirred up to give themselves to religion by the example of what he
          had done.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The epitaph was
          this:—</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“High estate, wealth, offspring, a mighty kingdom,
          triumphs, spoils, chieftains, strongholds, the camp, a home;
          whatsoever the valour of his sires, whatsoever himself had won,
          Caedwal, mighty in war, left for the love of God, that, a pilgrim
          king, he might behold Peter and Peter's seat, receive at his font
          pure waters of life, and in bright draughts drink of the shining
          radiance whence a quickening glory streams through all the world.
          And even as he gained with eager soul the prize of the new life, he
          laid aside barbaric rage, and, changed in heart, he changed his
          name with joy. Sergius the Pope bade him be called Peter, himself
          his father,<a href="#note_799" id="noteref_799" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">799</span></span></a> when
          he rose born anew from the font, and the grace of Christ, cleansing
          him, bore him forthwith clothed in white raiment to the heights of
          Heaven. O wondrous faith of the king, but greatest of all the mercy
          of Christ, into whose counsels none may enter! For he came in
          safety from the ends of the earth, even from Britain, through many
          a nation, over many a sea, by many a path, and saw the city of
          Romulus and looked upon Peter's sanctuary revered, bearing mystic
          gifts. He shall walk in white among the sheep of Christ in
          fellowship with them; for his body is in the tomb, but his soul on
          high. Thou mightest deem he did but change an earthly for a
          heavenly sceptre, whom thou seest attain to the kingdom of
          Christ.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Here was buried Caedwalla, called also Peter, king of
          the Saxons, on the twentieth day of April, in the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page314">[pg 314]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg314"/> second indiction, aged about thirty
          years, in the reign of our most pious lord, the Emperor
          Justinian,<a href="#note_800" id="noteref_800" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">800</span></span></a> in
          the fourth year of his consulship, in the second year of the
          pontificate of our Apostolic lord, Pope Sergius.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">When Caedwalla
          went to Rome, Ini<a href="#note_801" id="noteref_801" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">801</span></span></a>
          succeeded to the kingdom, being of the blood royal; and having
          reigned thirty-seven years over that nation, he in like manner left
          his kingdom and committed it to younger men, and went away to the
          threshold of the blessed Apostles, at the time when Gregory<a href="#note_802" id="noteref_802" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">802</span></span></a> was
          pope, being desirous to spend some part of his pilgrimage upon
          earth in the neighbourhood of the holy places, that he might obtain
          to be more readily received into the fellowship of the saints in
          heaven. This same thing, about that time, was wont to be done most
          zealously by many of the English nation, nobles and commons, laity
          and clergy, men and women.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc267"/> <a id="pdf268"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_V_Chap_VIII"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. VIII. How, when Archbishop
          Theodore died, Bertwald succeeded him as archbishop, and, among
          many others whom he ordained, he made the learned Tobias bishop of
          the church of Rochester. [690</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The year after
          that in which Caedwalla died at Rome, that is, 690 after the
          Incarnation of our Lord, Archbishop Theodore, of blessed memory,
          departed this life, being old and full of days, for he was
          eighty-eight years of age; which number of years he had been wont
          long before to foretell to his friends that he should live, the
          same having been revealed to him in a dream. He held the bishopric
          twenty-two years,<a href="#note_803" id="noteref_803" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">803</span></span></a> and
          was buried in St. Peter's church,<a href="#note_804" id="noteref_804" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">804</span></span></a> where
          all the bodies of the bishops of <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page315">[pg 315]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg315"/> Canterbury are buried. Of whom, as well as of
          his fellows of the same degree, it may rightly and truly be said,
          that their bodies are buried in peace, and their names shall live
          to all generations. For to say all in few words, the English
          Churches gained more spiritual increase while he was archbishop,
          than ever before. His character, life, age, and death, are plainly
          and manifestly described to all that resort thither, by the epitaph
          on his tomb, in thirty-four heroic verses.<a href="#note_805" id="noteref_805" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">805</span></span></a> The
          first whereof are these:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Here in the tomb rests the body of the holy prelate,
          called now in the Greek tongue Theodore. Chief pontiff, blest high
          priest, pure doctrine he set forth to his disciples.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The last are as
          follow:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“For September had reached its nineteenth day, when his
          spirit went forth from the prison-bars of the flesh. Mounting in
          bliss to the gracious fellowship of the new life, he was united to
          the angelic citizens in the heights of Heaven.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Bertwald<a href="#note_806" id="noteref_806" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">806</span></span></a>
          succeeded Theodore in the archbishopric, being abbot of the
          monastery called Racuulfe,<a href="#note_807" id="noteref_807" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">807</span></span></a> which
          stands at the northern mouth of the river Genlade.<a href="#note_808" id="noteref_808" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">808</span></span></a> He
          was a man learned in the Scriptures, and perfectly instructed in
          ecclesiastical and monastic teaching, yet in no wise to be compared
          to his predecessor. He was chosen bishop in the year of our Lord
          692,<a href="#note_809" id="noteref_809" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">809</span></span></a> on
          the first day of July, when Wictred and Suaebhard were kings
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page316">[pg 316]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg316"/> in Kent;<a href="#note_810" id="noteref_810" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">810</span></span></a> but
          he was ordained the next year, on Sunday the 29th of June, by
          Godwin, metropolitan bishop of Gaul,<a href="#note_811" id="noteref_811" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">811</span></span></a> and
          was enthroned on Sunday the 31st of August. Among the many bishops
          whom he ordained was Tobias,<a href="#note_812" id="noteref_812" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">812</span></span></a> a man
          instructed in the Latin, Greek, and Saxon tongues, and otherwise of
          manifold learning, whom he consecrated in the stead of Gedmund,
          bishop of the Church of Rochester, who had died.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc269"/> <a id="pdf270"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_V_Chap_IX"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. IX. How the holy man, Egbert,
          would have gone into Germany to preach, but could not; and how
          Wictbert went, but because he availed nothing, returned into
          Ireland, whence he came. [Circ. 688</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At that time the
          venerable servant of Christ, and priest, Egbert,<a href="#note_813" id="noteref_813" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">813</span></span></a> who
          is to be named with all honour, and who, as was said before, lived
          as a stranger and pilgrim in Ireland to obtain hereafter a country
          in heaven, purposed in his mind to profit many, taking upon him the
          work of an apostle, and, by preaching the Gospel, to bring the Word
          of God to some of those nations that had not yet heard it; many of
          which tribes he knew to be in Germany, from whom the Angles or
          Saxons, who now inhabit Britain, are known to have derived their
          race and origin; for which reason they are still corruptly
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page317">[pg 317]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg317"/> called <span class="tei tei-q">“Garmans”</span><a href="#note_814" id="noteref_814" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">814</span></span></a> by
          the neighbouring nation of the Britons. Such are the Frisians, the
          Rugini, the Danes, the Huns, the Old Saxons, and the
          Boructuari.<a href="#note_815" id="noteref_815" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">815</span></span></a> There
          are also in the same parts many other peoples still enslaved to
          pagan rites, to whom the aforesaid soldier of Christ determined to
          go, sailing round Britain, if haply he could deliver any of them
          from Satan, and bring them to Christ; or if this might not be, he
          was minded to go to Rome, to see and adore the thresholds of the
          holy Apostles and martyrs of Christ.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But a revelation
          from Heaven and the working of God prevented him from achieving
          either of these enterprises; for when he had made choice of most
          courageous companions, fit to preach the Word, inasmuch as they
          were renowned for their good deeds and their learning, and when all
          things necessary were provided for the voyage, there came to him on
          a certain day early in the morning one of the brethren, who had
          been a disciple of the priest, Boisil,<a href="#note_816" id="noteref_816" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">816</span></span></a>
          beloved of God, and had ministered to him in Britain, when the said
          Boisil was provost of the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page318">[pg
          318]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg318"/>
          monastery of Mailros,<a href="#note_817" id="noteref_817" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">817</span></span></a> under
          the Abbot Eata, as has been said above.<a href="#note_818" id="noteref_818" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">818</span></span></a> This
          brother told him a vision which he had seen that night.
          <span class="tei tei-q">“When after matins,”</span> said he,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“I had laid me down in my bed, and was
          fallen into a light slumber, Boisil, that was sometime my master
          and brought me up in all love, appeared to me, and asked, whether I
          knew him? I said, <span class="tei tei-q">‘Yes, you are
          Boisil.’</span> He answered, <span class="tei tei-q">‘I am come to
          bring Egbert a message from our Lord and Saviour, which must
          nevertheless be delivered to him by you. Tell him, therefore, that
          he cannot perform the journey he has undertaken; for it is the will
          of God that he should rather go to teach the monasteries of
          Columba.’</span> ”</span><a href="#note_819" id="noteref_819" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">819</span></span></a> Now
          Columba was the first teacher of the Christian faith to the Picts
          beyond the mountains northward, and the first founder of the
          monastery in the island of Hii, which was for a long time much
          honoured by many tribes of the Scots and Picts. The said Columba is
          now by some called Columcille, the name being compounded from
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Columba”</span> and <span class="tei tei-q">“Cella.”</span><a href="#note_820" id="noteref_820" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">820</span></span></a>
          Egbert, having heard the words of the vision, charged the brother
          that had told it him, not to tell it to any other, lest haply it
          should be a lying vision. But when he considered the matter
          secretly with himself, he apprehended that it was true, yet would
          not desist from preparing for his voyage which he purposed to make
          to teach those nations.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">A few days after
          the aforesaid brother came again to him, saying that Boisil had
          that night again appeared to him in a vision after matins, and
          said, <span class="tei tei-q">“Why did you tell Egbert so
          negligently and after so lukewarm a manner that which I enjoined
          upon you to say? Yet, go now and tell him, that whether he will or
          no, he must go <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page319">[pg
          319]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg319"/>
          to Columba's monasteries, because their ploughs are not driven
          straight; and he must bring them back into the right way.”</span>
          Hearing this, Egbert again charged the brother not to reveal the
          same to any man. Though now assured of the vision, he nevertheless
          attempted to set forth upon his intended voyage with the brethren.
          When they had put aboard all that was requisite for so long a
          voyage, and had waited some days for fair winds, there arose one
          night so violent a storm, that part of what was on board was lost,
          and the ship itself was left lying on its side in the sea.
          Nevertheless, all that belonged to Egbert and his companions was
          saved. Then he, saying, in the words of the prophet, <span class="tei tei-q">“For my sake this great tempest is upon
          you,”</span><a href="#note_821" id="noteref_821" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">821</span></span></a>
          withdrew himself from that undertaking and was content to remain at
          home.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But one of his
          companions, called Wictbert,<a href="#note_822" id="noteref_822" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">822</span></span></a>
          notable for his contempt of the world and for his learning and
          knowledge, for he had lived many years as a stranger and pilgrim in
          Ireland, leading a hermit's life in great perfection, took ship,
          and arriving in Frisland, preached the Word of salvation for the
          space of two whole years to that nation and to its king,
          Rathbed;<a href="#note_823" id="noteref_823" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">823</span></span></a> but
          reaped no fruit of all his great labour among his barbarous
          hearers. Returning then to the chosen place of his pilgrimage, he
          gave himself up to the Lord in his wonted life of silence, and
          since he could not be profitable to strangers by teaching them the
          faith, he took care to be the more profitable to his own people by
          the example of his virtue.</p>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page320">[pg 320]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg320"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc271"/> <a id="pdf272"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_V_Chap_X"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. X. How Wilbrord, preaching in
          Frisland, converted many to Christ; and how his two companions, the
          Hewalds, suffered martyrdom. [690</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">When the man of
          God, Egbert, perceived that neither he himself was permitted to go
          and preach to the nations, being withheld for the sake of some
          other advantage to the holy Church, whereof he had been forewarned
          by a revelation; nor that Wictbert, when he went into those parts,
          had availed to do anything; he nevertheless still attempted to send
          holy and industrious men to the work of the Word, among whom the
          most notable was Wilbrord,<a href="#note_824" id="noteref_824" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">824</span></span></a> a man
          eminent for his merit and rank as priest. They arrived there,
          twelve in number, and turning aside to Pippin,<a href="#note_825" id="noteref_825" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">825</span></span></a> duke
          of the Franks, were gladly received by him; and as he had lately
          subdued the nearer part of Frisland, and expelled King
          Rathbed,<a href="#note_826" id="noteref_826" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">826</span></span></a> he
          sent them thither to preach, supporting them at the same time with
          his sovereign authority, that none might molest them in their
          preaching, and bestowing many favours on those who consented to
          receive the faith. Thus it came to pass, that with the help of the
          Divine grace, in a short time they converted many from idolatry to
          the faith of Christ.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Following their
          example, two other priests of the English nation, who had long
          lived as strangers in Ireland, for the sake of the eternal country,
          went into the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page321">[pg
          321]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg321"/>
          province of the Old Saxons, if haply they could there win any to
          Christ by their preaching. They were alike in name as in devotion,
          Hewald being the name of both, with this distinction, that, on
          account of the different colour of their hair, the one was called
          Black Hewald and the other White Hewald.<a href="#note_827" id="noteref_827" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">827</span></span></a> They
          were both full of religious piety, but Black Hewald was the more
          learned of the two in Scripture. When they came into the province,
          these men took up their lodging in the guesthouse of a certain
          township-reeve, and asked of him that he would conduct them to the
          ealdorman<a href="#note_828" id="noteref_828" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">828</span></span></a> who
          was over him, for that they had a message concerning matters of
          importance to communicate to him. For those Old Saxons have no
          king, but many ealdormen set over their nation; and when any war is
          on the point of breaking out, they cast lots indifferently, and on
          whomsoever the lot falls, him they all follow and obey during the
          time of war; but as soon as the war is ended, all those ealdormen
          are again equal in power. So the reeve received and entertained
          them in his house some days, promising to send them to the
          ealdorman who was over him, as they desired.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But when the
          barbarians perceived that they were of another religion,—for they
          continually gave themselves to singing of psalms and prayer, and
          daily offered up to God the Sacrifice of the saving Victim, having
          with them sacred vessels and a consecrated table for an altar,—they
          began to grow suspicious of them, lest if they should come into the
          presence of their ealdorman, and converse with him, they should
          turn his heart from their gods, and convert him to the new religion
          of the Christian <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page322">[pg
          322]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg322"/>
          faith; and thus by degrees all their province should be forced to
          change its old worship for a new. Wherefore on a sudden they laid
          hold of them and put them to death; and White Hewald they slew
          outright with the sword; but they put Black Hewald to lingering
          torture and tore him limb from limb in horrible fashion, and they
          threw their bodies into the Rhine. The ealdorman, whom they had
          desired to see, hearing of it, was very angry that strangers who
          desired to come to him had not been suffered to come; and therefore
          he sent and put to death all those villagers and burned their
          village. The aforesaid priests and servants of Christ suffered on
          the 3rd of October.<a href="#note_829" id="noteref_829" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">829</span></span></a></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Miracles from
          Heaven were not lacking at their martyrdom. For their dead bodies,
          having been cast into the river by the pagans, as has been said,
          were carried against the stream for the space of almost forty
          miles, to the place where their companions were. Moreover, a long
          ray of light, reaching up to heaven, shone every night above them
          wheresoever they chanced to be, and that too in the sight of the
          very pagans that had slain them. Moreover, one of them appeared in
          a vision by night to one of his companions, whose name was Tilmon,
          a man of renown and of noble birth in this world, who having been a
          thegn had become a monk, telling him that he might find their
          bodies in that place, where he should see rays of light reaching
          from heaven to the earth. And so it befell; and their bodies being
          found, were buried with the honour due to martyrs; and the day of
          their passion or of the finding of their bodies, is celebrated in
          those parts with fitting veneration. Finally, Pippin, the most
          glorious duke of the Franks, learning these things, caused the
          bodies to be brought to him, and buried them with much honour in
          the church of the city of Cologne, on the Rhine.<a href="#note_830" id="noteref_830" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">830</span></span></a> And
          it is said that a spring burst forth in the place where they were
          killed, which to this day affords a plentiful stream in that same
          place.</p>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page323">[pg 323]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg323"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc273"/> <a id="pdf274"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_V_Chap_XI"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XI. How the venerable Suidbert
          in Britain, and Wilbrord at Rome, were ordained bishops for
          Frisland. [692</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At their first
          coming into Frisland, as soon as Wilbrord found that he had leave
          given him by the prince to preach there, he made haste to go to
          Rome, where Pope Sergius<a href="#note_831" id="noteref_831" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">831</span></span></a> then
          presided over the Apostolic see, that he might undertake the
          desired work of preaching the Gospel to the nations, with his
          licence and blessing; and hoping to receive of him some relics of
          the blessed Apostles and martyrs of Christ; to the end, that when
          he destroyed the idols,<a href="#note_832" id="noteref_832" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">832</span></span></a> and
          erected churches in the nation to which he preached, he might have
          the relics of saints at hand to put into them, and having deposited
          them there, might accordingly dedicate each of those places to the
          honour of the saint whose relics they were. He desired also there
          to learn or to receive many other things needful for so great a
          work. Having obtained his desire in all these matters, he returned
          to preach.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At which time,
          the brothers who were in Frisland, attending on the ministry of the
          Word, chose out of their own number a man of sober life, and meek
          of heart, called Suidbert,<a href="#note_833" id="noteref_833" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">833</span></span></a> to be
          ordained bishop for them. He, being sent into Britain, was
          consecrated, at their request, by the most reverend Bishop Wilfrid,
          who, having been driven out of his country, chanced then to be
          living in banishment among the Mercians;<a href="#note_834" id="noteref_834" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">834</span></span></a> for
          Kent had no bishop at that time, Theodore being dead, and Bertwald,
          his successor, who had gone beyond the sea to be ordained, having
          not yet returned to his episcopal see.</p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page324">[pg 324]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg324"/>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The said
          Suidbert, being made bishop, returned from Britain, and not long
          after departed to the Boructuari; and by his preaching brought many
          of them into the way of truth; but the Boructuari being not long
          after subdued by the Old Saxons, those who had received the Word
          were dispersed abroad; and the bishop himself with certain others
          went to Pippin, who, at the request of his wife, Blithryda,<a href="#note_835" id="noteref_835" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">835</span></span></a> gave
          him a place of abode in a certain island on the Rhine, called in
          their tongue, Inlitore;<a href="#note_836" id="noteref_836" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">836</span></span></a> there
          he built a monastery, which his successors still possess, and for a
          time dwelt in it, leading a most continent life, and there ended
          his days.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">When they who
          had gone thither had spent some years teaching in Frisland, Pippin,
          with the consent of them all, sent the venerable Wilbrord to Rome,
          where Sergius was still pope, desiring that he might be consecrated
          archbishop over the nation of the Frisians; which was accordingly
          done, as he had made request, in the year of our Lord 696. He was
          consecrated in the church of the Holy Martyr Cecilia,<a href="#note_837" id="noteref_837" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">837</span></span></a> on
          her festival; and the said pope gave him the name of Clement, and
          forthwith sent him back to his bishopric, to wit, fourteen days
          after his arrival in the city.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Pippin gave him
          a place for his episcopal see, in his famous fort, which in the
          ancient language of those people is called Wiltaburg, that is, the
          town of the Wilts; but, in the Gallic tongue, Trajectum.<a href="#note_838" id="noteref_838" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">838</span></span></a> The
          most reverend prelate having built a church there,<a href="#note_839" id="noteref_839" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">839</span></span></a> and
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page325">[pg 325]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg325"/> preaching the Word
          of faith far and near, drew many from their errors, and built many
          churches and not a few monasteries. For not long after he himself
          constituted other bishops in those parts from the number of the
          brethren that either came with him or after him to preach there; of
          whom some are now fallen asleep in the Lord; but Wilbrord himself,
          surnamed Clement, is still living, venerable for his great age,
          having been thirty-six years a bishop, and now, after manifold
          conflicts of the heavenly warfare, he longs with all his heart for
          the recompense of the reward in Heaven.<a href="#note_840" id="noteref_840" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">840</span></span></a></p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc275"/> <a id="pdf276"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_V_Chap_XII"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XII. How one in the province of
          the Northumbrians, rose from the dead, and related many things
          which he had seen, some to be greatly dreaded and some to be
          desired. [Circ. 696</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At this time a
          memorable miracle, and like to those of former days, was wrought in
          Britain; for, to the end that the living might be roused from the
          death of the soul, a certain man, who had been some time dead, rose
          again to the life of the body, and related many memorable things
          that he had seen; some of which I have thought fit here briefly to
          describe. There was a certain householder in that district of the
          Northumbrians which is called Incuneningum,<a href="#note_841" id="noteref_841" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">841</span></span></a> who
          led a godly life, with all his house. This man fell sick, and his
          sickness daily increasing, he was brought to extremity, and died in
          the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page326">[pg 326]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg326"/> beginning of the
          night; but at dawn he came to life again, and suddenly sat up,
          whereat all those that sat about the body weeping fled away in
          great terror, only his wife, who loved him better, though trembling
          and greatly afraid, remained with him. And he comforting her, said,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Fear not, for I am now in very deed risen
          from death whereof I was holden, and permitted again to live among
          men; nevertheless, hereafter I must not live as I was wont, but
          after a very different manner.”</span> Then rising immediately, he
          went to the oratory of the little town, and continuing in prayer
          till day, forthwith divided all his substance into three parts; one
          whereof he gave to his wife, another to his children, and the
          third, which he kept himself, he straightway distributed among the
          poor. Not long after, being set free from the cares of this world,
          he came to the monastery of Mailros,<a href="#note_842" id="noteref_842" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">842</span></span></a> which
          is almost enclosed by the winding of the river Tweed, and having
          received the tonsure, went apart into a place of abode which the
          abbot had provided, and there he continued till the day of his
          death, in so great contrition of mind and mortifying of the body,
          that even if his tongue had been silent, his life would have
          declared that he had seen many things either to be dreaded or
          coveted, which were hidden from other men.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Thus he related
          what he had seen.<a href="#note_843" id="noteref_843" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">843</span></span></a>
<span class="tei tei-q">“He that led me had a countenance full of
          light, and shining raiment, and we went in silence, as it seemed to
          me, towards the rising of the summer sun. And as we walked we came
          to a broad and deep valley of infinite length; it lay on our left,
          and one side of it was exceeding terrible with raging flames, the
          other no less intolerable for violent hail and cold snows drifting
          and sweeping through all the place. Both sides were full of the
          souls of men which seemed to be tossed from one side to the other
          as it were by a violent storm; for when they could no longer endure
          the fervent heat, the hapless souls leaped <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page327">[pg 327]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg327"/> into the midst of the deadly cold; and
          finding no rest there, they leaped back again to be burnt in the
          midst of the unquenchable flames. Now whereas an innumerable
          multitude of misshapen spirits were thus tormented far and near
          with this interchange of misery, as far as I could see, without any
          interval of rest, I began to think that peradventure this might be
          Hell, of whose intolerable torments I had often heard men talk. My
          guide, who went before me, answered to my thought, saying,
          <span class="tei tei-q">‘Think not so, for this is not the Hell you
          believe it to be.’</span></span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“When he had led me farther by degrees, sore dismayed
          by that dread sight, on a sudden I saw the place before us begin to
          grow dark and filled with shadows. When we entered into them, the
          shadows by degrees grew so thick, that I could see nothing else,
          save only the darkness and the shape and garment of him that led
          me. As we went on <span class="tei tei-q">‘through the shades in
          the lone night,’</span><a href="#note_844" id="noteref_844" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">844</span></span></a> lo!
          on a sudden there appeared before us masses of foul flame
          constantly rising as it were out of a great pit, and falling back
          again into the same. When I had been led thither, my guide suddenly
          vanished, and left me alone in the midst of darkness and these
          fearful sights. As those same masses of fire, without intermission,
          at one time flew up and at another fell back into the bottom of the
          abyss, I perceived that the summits of all the flames, as they
          ascended were full of the spirits of men, which, like sparks flying
          upwards with the smoke, were sometimes thrown on high, and again,
          when the vapours of the fire fell, dropped down into the depths
          below. Moreover, a stench, foul beyond compare, burst forth with
          the vapours, and filled all those dark places.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Having stood there a long time in much dread, not
          knowing what to do, which way to turn, or what end awaited me, on a
          sudden I heard behind me the sound of a mighty and miserable
          lamentation, and at the same time noisy laughter, as of a rude
          multitude insulting captured enemies. When that noise, growing
          plainer, came up to me, I beheld a crowd of evil spirits dragging
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page328">[pg 328]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg328"/> five souls of men,
          wailing and shrieking, into the midst of the darkness, whilst they
          themselves exulted and laughed. Among those human souls, as I could
          discern, there was one shorn like a clerk, one a layman, and one a
          woman. The evil spirits that dragged them went down into the midst
          of the burning pit; and it came to pass that as they went down
          deeper, I could no longer distinguish between the lamentation of
          the men and the laughing of the devils, yet I still had a confused
          sound in my ears. In the meantime, some of the dark spirits
          ascended from that flaming abyss, and running forward, beset me on
          all sides, and with their flaming eyes and the noisome fire which
          they breathed forth from their mouths and nostrils, tried to choke
          me; and threatened to lay hold on me with fiery tongs, which they
          had in their hands, yet they durst in no wise touch me, though they
          assayed to terrify me. Being thus on all sides encompassed with
          enemies and shades of darkness, and casting my eyes hither and
          thither if haply anywhere help might be found whereby I might be
          saved, there appeared behind me, on the way by which I had come, as
          it were, the brightness of a star shining amidst the darkness;
          which waxing greater by degrees, came rapidly towards me: and when
          it drew near, all those evil spirits, that sought to carry me away
          with their tongs, dispersed and fled.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Now he, whose approach put them to flight, was the
          same that led me before; who, then turning towards the right, began
          to lead me, as it were, towards the rising of the winter sun, and
          having soon brought me out of the darkness, led me forth into an
          atmosphere of clear light. While he thus led me in open light, I
          saw a vast wall before us, the length on either side, and the
          height whereof, seemed to be altogether boundless. I began to
          wonder why we went up to the wall, seeing no door in it, nor
          window, nor any way of ascent. But when we came to the wall, we
          were presently, I know not by what means, on the top of it, and lo!
          there was a wide and pleasant plain full of such fragrance of
          blooming flowers that the marvellous sweetness of the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page329">[pg 329]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg329"/> scents immediately dispelled the foul
          stench of the dark furnace which had filled my nostrils. So great
          was the light shed over all this place that it seemed to exceed the
          brightness of the day, or the rays of the noontide sun. In this
          field were innumerable companies of men clothed in white, and many
          seats of rejoicing multitudes. As he led me through the midst of
          bands of happy inhabitants, I began to think that this perchance
          might be the kingdom of Heaven, of which I had often heard tell. He
          answered to my thought, saying, <span class="tei tei-q">‘Nay, this
          is not the kingdom of Heaven, as you think.’</span></span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“When we had also passed those mansions of blessed
          spirits, and gone farther on, I saw before me a much more beautiful
          light than before, and therein heard sweet sounds of singing, and
          so wonderful a fragrance was shed abroad from the place, that the
          other which I had perceived before and thought so great, then
          seemed to me but a small thing; even as that wondrous brightness of
          the flowery field, compared with this which I now beheld, appeared
          mean and feeble. When I began to hope that we should enter that
          delightful place, my guide, on a sudden stood still; and
          straightway turning, led me back by the way we came.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“In our return, when we came to those joyous mansions
          of the white-robed spirits, he said to me, <span class="tei tei-q">‘Do you know what all these things are which you have
          seen?’</span> I answered, <span class="tei tei-q">‘No,’</span> and
          then he said, <span class="tei tei-q">‘That valley which you beheld
          terrible with flaming fire and freezing cold, is the place in which
          the souls of those are tried and punished, who, delaying to confess
          and amend their crimes, at length have recourse to repentance at
          the point of death, and so go forth from the body; but nevertheless
          because they, even at their death, confessed and repented, they
          shall all be received into the kingdom of Heaven at the day of
          judgement; but many are succoured before the day of judgement, by
          the prayers of the living and their alms and fasting, and more
          especially by the celebration of Masses. Moreover that foul flaming
          pit which you saw, is the mouth of Hell, into which whosoever falls
          shall never be delivered to all eternity. This <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page330">[pg 330]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg330"/> flowery place, in which you see this
          fair and youthful company, all bright and joyous, is that into
          which the souls of those are received who, indeed, when they leave
          the body have done good works, but who are not so perfect as to
          deserve to be immediately admitted into the kingdom of Heaven; yet
          they shall all, at the day of judgement, behold Christ, and enter
          into the joys of His kingdom; for such as are perfect in every word
          and deed and thought, as soon as they quit the body, forthwith
          enter into the kingdom of Heaven; in the neighbourhood whereof that
          place is, where you heard the sound of sweet singing amidst the
          savour of a sweet fragrance and brightness of light. As for you,
          who must now return to the body, and again live among men, if you
          will seek diligently to examine your actions, and preserve your
          manner of living and your words in righteousness and simplicity,
          you shall, after death, have a place of abode among these joyful
          troops of blessed souls which you behold. For when I left you for
          awhile, it was for this purpose, that I might learn what should
          become of you.’</span> When he had said this to me, I much abhorred
          returning to the body, being delighted with the sweetness and
          beauty of the place which I beheld, and with the company of those I
          saw in it. Nevertheless, I durst not ask my guide anything; but
          thereupon, on a sudden, I found myself, I know not how, alive among
          men.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Now these and
          other things which this man of God had seen, he would not relate to
          slothful men, and such as lived negligently; but only to those who,
          being terrified with the dread of torments, or ravished with the
          hope of everlasting joys, would draw from his words the means to
          advance in piety. In the neighbourhood of his cell lived one
          Haemgils, a monk, and eminent in the priesthood, whose good works
          were worthy of his office: he is still living, and leading a
          solitary life in Ireland, supporting his declining age with coarse
          bread and cold water. He often went to that man, and by repeated
          questioning, heard of him what manner of things he had seen when
          out of the body; by whose account those few particulars which we
          have briefly set down came also to <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page331">[pg 331]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg331"/> our knowledge. And he related his visions to
          King Aldfrid,<a href="#note_845" id="noteref_845" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">845</span></span></a> a man
          most learned in all respects, and was by him so willingly and
          attentively heard, that at his request he was admitted into the
          monastery above-mentioned, and received the crown of the monastic
          tonsure; and the said king, whensoever he came into those parts,
          very often went to hear him. At that time the abbot and priest
          Ethelwald,<a href="#note_846" id="noteref_846" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">846</span></span></a> a man
          of godly and sober life, presided over that monastery. He now
          occupies the episcopal see of the church of Lindisfarne, leading a
          life worthy of his degree.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He had a place
          of abode assigned him apart in that monastery, where he might give
          himself more freely to the service of his Creator in continual
          prayer. And inasmuch as that place was on the banks of the river,
          he was wont often to go into the same for the great desire he had
          to do penance in his body, and oftentimes to plunge in it, and to
          continue saying psalms or prayers in the same as long as he could
          endure it, standing still, while the waves flowed over him,
          sometimes up to the middle, and sometimes even to the neck in
          water; and when he went ashore, he never took off his cold, wet
          garments till they grew warm and dry on his body. And when in the
          winter the cracking pieces of ice were floating about him, which he
          had himself sometimes broken, to make room to stand or plunge in
          the river, and those who beheld it would say, <span class="tei tei-q">“We marvel, brother Drythelm (for so he was called),
          that you are able to endure such severe cold;”</span> he answered
          simply, for he was a simple and sober-spirited man, <span class="tei tei-q">“I have seen greater cold.”</span> And when they said,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“We marvel that you choose to observe so
          hard a rule of continence,”</span> he <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page332">[pg 332]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg332"/> replied, <span class="tei tei-q">“I have seen
          harder things.”</span> And so, until the day of his calling hence,
          in his unwearied desire of heavenly bliss, he subdued his aged body
          with daily fasting, and forwarded the salvation of many by his
          words and life.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc277"/> <a id="pdf278"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_V_Chap_XIII"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XIII. How another contrarywise
          before his death saw a book containing his sins, which was shown
          him by devils. [704-709</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But contrarywise
          there was a man in the province of the Mercians, whose visions and
          words, but not his manner of life, were of profit to others, though
          not to himself. In the reign of Coenred,<a href="#note_847" id="noteref_847" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">847</span></span></a> who
          succeeded Ethelred, there was a layman who was a king's thegn, no
          less acceptable to the king for his outward industry, than
          displeasing to him for his neglect of his own soul. The king
          diligently admonished him to confess and amend, and to forsake his
          evil ways, lest he should lose all time for repentance and
          amendment by a sudden death. But though frequently warned, he
          despised the words of salvation, and promised that he would do
          penance at some future time. In the meantime, falling sick he
          betook himself to his bed, and was tormented with grievous pains.
          The king coming to him (for he loved the man much) exhorted him,
          even then, before death, to repent of his offences. But he answered
          that he would not then confess his sins, but would do it when he
          was recovered of his sickness, lest his companions should upbraid
          him with having done that for fear of death, which he had refused
          to do in health. He thought he spoke very bravely, but it
          afterwards appeared that he had been miserably deceived by the
          wiles of the Devil.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The disease
          increasing, when the king came again to visit and instruct him, he
          cried out straightway with a lamentable voice, <span class="tei tei-q">“What will you now? What are you <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page333">[pg 333]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg333"/> come for? for you can no longer do
          aught for my profit or salvation.”</span> The king answered,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Say not so; take heed and be of sound
          mind.”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“I am not mad,”</span>
          replied he, <span class="tei tei-q">“but I now know the worst and
          have it for certain before my eyes.”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“What is that?”</span> said the king. <span class="tei tei-q">“Not long since,”</span> said he, <span class="tei tei-q">“there came into this room two fair youths, and sat
          down by me, the one at my head, and the other at my feet. One of
          them drew forth a book most beautiful, but very small, and gave it
          me to read; looking into it, I there found all the good actions I
          had ever done in my life written down, and they were very few and
          inconsiderable. They took back the book and said nothing to me.
          Then, on a sudden, appeared an army of evil spirits of hideous
          countenance, and they beset this house without, and sitting down
          filled the greater part of it within. Then he, who by the blackness
          of his gloomy face, and his sitting above the rest, seemed to be
          the chief of them, taking out a book terrible to behold, of a
          monstrous size, and of almost insupportable weight, commanded one
          of his followers to bring it to me to read. Having read it, I found
          therein most plainly written in hideous characters, all the crimes
          I ever committed, not only in word and deed, but even in the least
          thought; and he said to those glorious men in white raiment who sat
          by me, <span class="tei tei-q">‘Why sit ye here, since ye know of a
          surety that this man is ours?’</span> They answered, <span class="tei tei-q">‘Ye speak truly; take him and lead him away to fill up
          the measure of your damnation.’</span> This said, they forthwith
          vanished, and two wicked spirits arose, having in their hands
          ploughshares, and one of them struck me on the head, and the other
          on the foot. And these ploughshares are now with great torment
          creeping into the inward parts of my body, and as soon as they meet
          I shall die, and the devils being ready to snatch me away, I shall
          be dragged into the dungeons of hell.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Thus spoke that
          wretch in his despair, and soon after died, and now in vain suffers
          in eternal torments that penance which he failed to suffer for a
          short time with the fruits of forgiveness. Of whom it is manifest,
          that (as the blessed Pope Gregory writes of certain persons)
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page334">[pg 334]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg334"/> he did not see these
          things for his own sake, since they did not avail him, but for the
          sake of others, who, knowing of his end, should be afraid to put
          off the time of repentance, whilst they have leisure, lest, being
          prevented by sudden death, they should perish impenitent. And
          whereas he saw diverse books laid before him by the good and evil
          spirits, this was done by Divine dispensation, that we may keep in
          mind that our deeds and thoughts are not scattered to the winds,
          but are all kept to be examined by the Supreme Judge, and will in
          the end be shown us either by friendly angels or by the enemy. And
          whereas the angels first drew forth a white book, and then the
          devils a black one; the former a very small one, the latter one
          very great; it is to be observed, that in his first years he did
          some good actions, all which he nevertheless obscured by the evil
          actions of his youth. If, contrarywise, he had taken care in his
          youth to correct the errors of his boyhood, and by well-doing to
          put them away from the sight of God, he might have been admitted to
          the fellowship of those of whom the Psalm says, <span class="tei tei-q">“Blessed are those whose iniquities are forgiven, and
          whose sins are covered.”</span><a href="#note_848" id="noteref_848" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">848</span></span></a> This
          story, as I learned it of the venerable Bishop Pechthelm,<a href="#note_849" id="noteref_849" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">849</span></span></a> I
          have thought good to set forth plainly, for the salvation of such
          as shall read or hear it.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc279"/> <a id="pdf280"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XIV. How another in like
          manner, being at the point of death, saw the place of punishment
          appointed for him in Hell.</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">I myself knew a
          brother, would to God I had not known him, whose name I could
          mention if it were of any avail, dwelling in a famous monastery,
          but himself living infamously. He was oftentimes rebuked by the
          brethren and elders of the place, and admonished to be converted to
          a more chastened life; and though he would not give ear to them,
          they bore with him long and patiently, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page335">[pg 335]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg335"/> on account of their need of his outward
          service, for he was a cunning artificer. But he was much given to
          drunkenness, and other pleasures of a careless life, and more used
          to stop in his workshop day and night, than to go to church to sing
          and pray and hear the Word of life with the brethren. For which
          reason it befell him according to the saying, that he who will not
          willingly humble himself and enter the gate of the church must
          needs be led against his will into the gate of Hell, being damned.
          For he falling sick, and being brought to extremity, called the
          brethren, and with much lamentation, like one damned, began to tell
          them, that he saw Hell opened, and Satan sunk in the depths
          thereof; and Caiaphas, with the others that slew our Lord, hard by
          him, delivered up to avenging flames. <span class="tei tei-q">“In
          whose neighbourhood,”</span> said he, <span class="tei tei-q">“I
          see a place of eternal perdition prepared for me, miserable wretch
          that I am.”</span> The brothers, hearing these words, began
          diligently to exhort him, that he should repent even then, whilst
          he was still in the flesh. He answered in despair, <span class="tei tei-q">“There is no time for me now to change my course of
          life, when I have myself seen my judgement passed.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Whilst uttering
          these words, he died without having received the saving Viaticum,
          and his body was buried in the farthest parts of the monastery, nor
          did any one dare either to say Masses or sing psalms, or even to
          pray for him.<a href="#note_850" id="noteref_850" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">850</span></span></a> Oh
          how far asunder hath God put light from darkness! The blessed
          Stephen, the first martyr, being about to suffer death for the
          truth, saw the heavens opened, and the glory of God, and Jesus
          standing on the right hand of God;<a href="#note_851" id="noteref_851" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">851</span></span></a> and
          where he was to be after death, there he fixed the eyes of his
          mind, that he might die the more joyfully. But this workman, of
          darkened mind and life, when death was at hand, saw Hell opened,
          and witnessed the damnation of the Devil and his followers; he saw
          also, unhappy wretch! his own prison among them, to the end that,
          despairing of salvation, he might himself die the more miserably,
          but might by his perdition <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page336">[pg 336]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg336"/> afford cause of salvation to the living who
          should hear of it. This befell of late in the province of the
          Bernicians, and being noised abroad far and near, inclined many to
          do penance for their sins without delay. Would to God that this
          also might come to pass through the reading of our words!</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc281"/> <a id="pdf282"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_V_Chap_XV"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XV. How divers churches of the
          Scots, at the instance of Adamnan, adopted the Catholic Easter; and
          how the same wrote a book about the holy places. [703</span>
<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At this time a
          great part of the Scots in Ireland,<a href="#note_852" id="noteref_852" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">852</span></span></a> and
          some also of the Britons in Britain,<a href="#note_853" id="noteref_853" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">853</span></span></a> by
          the grace of God, adopted the reasonable and ecclesiastical time of
          keeping Easter. For when Adamnan,<a href="#note_854" id="noteref_854" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">854</span></span></a>
          priest and abbot of the monks that were in the island of Hii, was
          sent by his nation on a mission to Aldfrid, king of the
          English,<a href="#note_855" id="noteref_855" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">855</span></span></a> he
          abode some time in that province, and saw the canonical rites of
          the Church. Moreover, he was earnestly admonished by many of the
          more learned sort, not to presume to live contrary to the universal
          custom of the Church, either in regard to the observance of Easter,
          or any other ordinances whatsoever, with those few followers of his
          dwelling in the farthest corner of the world. <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page337">[pg 337]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg337"/> Wherefore he so changed his mind, that
          he readily preferred those things which he had seen and heard in
          the English churches, to the customs which he and his people had
          hitherto followed. For he was a good and wise man, and excellently
          instructed in knowledge of the Scriptures. Returning home, he
          endeavoured to bring his own people that were in Hii, or that were
          subject to that monastery, into the way of truth, which he had
          embraced with all his heart; but he could not prevail. He sailed
          over into Ireland,<a href="#note_856" id="noteref_856" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">856</span></span></a> and
          preaching to those people, and with sober words of exhortation
          making known to them the lawful time of Easter, he brought back
          many of them, and almost all that were free from the dominion of
          those of Hii, from the error of their fathers to the Catholic
          unity, and taught them to keep the lawful time of Easter.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Returning to his
          island, after having celebrated the canonical Easter in Ireland, he
          was instant in preaching the Catholic observance of the season of
          Easter in his monastery, yet without being able to achieve his end;
          and it so happened that he departed this life before the next year
          came round,<a href="#note_857" id="noteref_857" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">857</span></span></a> the
          Divine goodness so ordaining it, that as he was a great lover of
          peace and unity, he should be taken away to everlasting life before
          he should be obliged, on the return of the season of Easter, to be
          at greater variance with those that would not follow him into the
          truth.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">This same man
          wrote a book concerning the holy places, of great profit to many
          readers; his authority was the teaching and dictation of Arculf, a
          bishop of Gaul,<a href="#note_858" id="noteref_858" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">858</span></span></a> who
          had gone to Jerusalem for the sake of the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page338">[pg 338]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg338"/> holy places; and having wandered over all the
          Promised Land, travelled also to Damascus, Constantinople,
          Alexandria, and many islands in the sea, and returning home by
          ship, was cast upon the western coast of Britain by a great
          tempest. After many adventures he came to the aforesaid servant of
          Christ, Adamnan, and being found to be learned in the Scriptures,
          and acquainted with the holy places, was most gladly received by
          him and gladly heard, insomuch that whatsoever he said that he had
          seen worthy of remembrance in the holy places, Adamnan straightway
          set himself to commit to writing. Thus he composed a work, as I
          have said, profitable to many, and chiefly to those who, being far
          removed from those places where the patriarchs and Apostles lived,
          know no more of them than what they have learnt by reading. Adamnan
          presented this book to King Aldfrid, and through his bounty it came
          to be read by lesser persons.<a href="#note_859" id="noteref_859" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">859</span></span></a> The
          writer thereof was also rewarded by him with many gifts and sent
          back into his country. I believe it will be of advantage to our
          readers if we collect some passages from his writings, and insert
          them in this our History.<a href="#note_860" id="noteref_860" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">860</span></span></a></p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc283"/> <a id="pdf284"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XVI. The account given in the
          aforesaid book of the place of our Lord's Nativity, Passion, and
          Resurrection.</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He wrote
          concerning the place of the Nativity of our Lord, after this
          manner:<a href="#note_861" id="noteref_861" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">861</span></span></a>
<span class="tei tei-q">“Bethlehem, the city of David, is situated
          on a narrow ridge, encompassed on all sides with valleys, being a
          mile in length from west to east, and having a low wall without
          towers, built along the edge of the level summit. In the eastern
          corner thereof <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page339">[pg
          339]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg339"/>
          is a sort of natural half cave, the outward part whereof is said to
          have been the place where our Lord was born; the inner is called
          the manger of our Lord. This cave within is all covered with rich
          marble, and over the particular spot where our Lord is said to have
          been born, stands the great church of St. Mary.”</span> He likewise
          wrote about the place of His Passion and Resurrection in this
          manner: <span class="tei tei-q">“Entering the city of Jerusalem on
          the north side, the first place to be visited, according to the
          disposition of the streets, is the church of Constantine, called
          the Martyrium. It was built by the Emperor Constantine, in a royal
          and magnificent manner, because the Cross of our Lord was said to
          have been found there by his mother Helena. Thence, to the
          westward, is seen the church of Golgotha, in which is also to be
          found the rock which once bore the Cross to which the Lord's body
          was nailed, and now it upholds a large silver cross, having a great
          brazen wheel with lamps hanging over it. Under the place of our
          Lord's Cross, a crypt is hewn out of the rock, in which the
          Sacrifice is offered on an altar for the dead that are held in
          honour, their bodies remaining meanwhile in the street. To the
          westward of this church is the round church of the Anastasis or
          Resurrection of our Lord, encompassed with three walls, and
          supported by twelve columns. Between each of the walls is a broad
          passage, which contains three altars at three different points of
          the middle wall; to the south, the north, and the west. It has
          eight doors or entrances in a straight line through the three
          walls; four whereof face the south-east, and four the east.<a href="#note_862" id="noteref_862" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">862</span></span></a> In
          the midst of it is the round tomb of our Lord cut out of the rock,
          the top of of which a man standing within can touch with his hand;
          on the east is the entrance, against which that great stone was
          set. To this day the tomb bears the marks of the iron tools within,
          but on the outside it is all covered with marble to the very top of
          the roof, which is adorned with gold, and bears a large golden
          cross. In the north <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page340">[pg
          340]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg340"/>
          part of the tomb the sepulchre of our Lord is hewn out of the same
          rock, seven feet in length, and three hand-breadths above the
          floor; the entrance being on the south side, where twelve lamps
          burn day and night, four within the sepulchre, and eight above on
          the edge of the right side. The stone that was set at the entrance
          to the tomb is now cleft in two; nevertheless, the lesser part of
          it stands as an altar of hewn stone before the door of the tomb;
          the greater part is set up as another altar, four-cornered, at the
          east end of the same church, and is covered with linen cloths. The
          colour of the said tomb and sepulchre is white and red mingled
          together.”</span><a href="#note_863" id="noteref_863" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">863</span></span></a></p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc285"/> <a id="pdf286"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_V_Chap_XVII"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XVII. What he likewise wrote of
          the place of our Lord's Ascension, and the tombs of the
          patriarchs.</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Concerning the
          place of our Lord's Ascension, the aforesaid author writes thus.
          <span class="tei tei-q">“The Mount of Olives is equal in height to
          Mount Sion, but exceeds it in breadth and length; it bears few
          trees besides vines and olives, and is fruitful in wheat and
          barley, for the nature of that soil is not such as to yield
          thickets,<a href="#note_864" id="noteref_864" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">864</span></span></a> but
          grass and flowers. On the very top of it, where our Lord ascended
          into heaven, is a large round church,<a href="#note_865" id="noteref_865" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">865</span></span></a>
          having round about it <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page341">[pg
          341]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg341"/>
          three chapels with vaulted roofs. For the inner building could not
          be vaulted and roofed, by reason of the passage of our Lord's Body;
          but it has an altar on the east side, sheltered by a narrow roof.
          In the midst of it are to be seen the last Footprints of our Lord,
          the place where He ascended being open to the sky; and though the
          earth is daily carried away by believers, yet still it remains, and
          retains the same appearance, being marked by the impression of the
          Feet. Round about these lies a brazen wheel, as high as a man's
          neck, having an entrance from the west, with a great lamp hanging
          above it on a pulley and burning night and day. In the western part
          of the same church are eight windows; and as many lamps, hanging
          opposite to them by cords, shine through the glass as far as
          Jerusalem; and the light thereof is said to thrill the hearts of
          the beholders with a certain zeal and compunction. Every year, on
          the day of the Ascension of our Lord, when Mass is ended, a strong
          blast of wind is wont to come down, and to cast to the ground all
          that are in the church.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Of the situation
          of Hebron, and the tombs of the fathers,<a href="#note_866" id="noteref_866" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">866</span></span></a> he
          writes thus. <span class="tei tei-q">“Hebron, once a habitation and
          the chief city of David's kingdom, now only showing by its ruins
          what it then was, has, one furlong to the east of it, a double cave
          in the valley, where the sepulchres of the patriarchs are
          encompassed with a wall four-square, their heads lying to the
          north. Each of the tombs is covered with a single stone, hewn like
          the stones of a church, and of a white colour, for the three
          patriarchs. Adam's is of meaner and poorer workmanship, and he lies
          not far from them at the farthest end of the northern part of that
          wall. There are also some poorer and <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page342">[pg 342]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg342"/> smaller monuments of the three women. The
          hill Mamre is a mile from these tombs, and is covered with grass
          and flowers, having a level plain on the top. In the northern part
          of it, the trunk of Abraham's oak, being twice as high as a man, is
          enclosed in a church.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Thus much,
          gathered from the works of the aforesaid writer, according to the
          sense of his words, but more briefly and in fewer words, we have
          thought fit to insert in our History for the profit of readers.
          Whosoever desires to know more of the contents of that book, may
          seek it either in the book itself, or in that abridgement which we
          have lately made from it.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc287"/> <a id="pdf288"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_V_Chap_XVIII"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XVIII. How the South Saxons
          received Eadbert and Eolla, and the West Saxons, Daniel and
          Aldhelm, for their bishops; and of the writings of the same
          Aldhelm. [705</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year of
          our Lord 705, Aldfrid, king of the Northumbrians, died<a href="#note_867" id="noteref_867" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">867</span></span></a>
          before the end of the twentieth year of his reign. His son
          Osred,<a href="#note_868" id="noteref_868" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">868</span></span></a> a boy
          about eight years of age, succeeding him in the throne, reigned
          eleven years. In the beginning of his reign, Haedde, bishop of the
          West Saxons,<a href="#note_869" id="noteref_869" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">869</span></span></a>
          departed to the heavenly life; for he was a good man and a just,
          and his life and doctrine as a bishop were guided rather by his
          innate love of virtue, than by what he had gained from books. The
          most <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page343">[pg 343]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg343"/> reverend bishop,
          Pechthelm, of whom we shall speak hereafter in the proper
          place,<a href="#note_870" id="noteref_870" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">870</span></span></a> and
          who while still deacon or monk was for a long time with his
          successor Aldhelm,<a href="#note_871" id="noteref_871" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">871</span></span></a> was
          wont to relate that many miracles of healing have been wrought in
          the place where he died, through the merit of his sanctity; and
          that the men of that province used to carry the dust thence for the
          sick, and put it into water, and the drinking thereof, or
          sprinkling with it, brought health to many sick men and beasts; so
          that the holy dust being frequently carried away, a great hole was
          made there.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Upon his death,
          the bishopric of that province was divided into two dioceses.<a href="#note_872" id="noteref_872" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">872</span></span></a> One
          of them was given to <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page344">[pg
          344]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg344"/>
          Daniel,<a href="#note_873" id="noteref_873" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">873</span></span></a> which
          he governs to this day; the other to Aldhelm, wherein he presided
          most vigorously four years; both of them were fully instructed, as
          well in matters touching the Church as in the knowledge of the
          Scriptures. Aldhelm, when he was as yet only a priest and abbot of
          the monastery which is called the city of Maildufus,<a href="#note_874" id="noteref_874" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">874</span></span></a> by
          order of a synod of his own nation, wrote a notable book<a href="#note_875" id="noteref_875" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">875</span></span></a>
          against the error of the Britons, in not celebrating Easter at the
          due time, and in doing divers other things contrary to the purity
          of doctrine and the peace of the church; and through the reading of
          this book many of the Britons, who were subject to the West Saxons,
          were led by him to adopt the Catholic celebration of our Lord's
          Paschal Feast. He likewise wrote a famous book on Virginity,<a href="#note_876" id="noteref_876" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">876</span></span></a>
          which, after the example of Sedulius,<a href="#note_877" id="noteref_877" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">877</span></span></a> he
          composed in twofold form, in hexameters and in prose. He wrote some
          other books, being a man most instructed in all respects, for he
          had a polished style,<a href="#note_878" id="noteref_878" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">878</span></span></a> and
          was, as I have said, of marvellous learning both in liberal and
          ecclesiastical studies. On his death, Forthere<a href="#note_879" id="noteref_879" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">879</span></span></a>
<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page345">[pg 345]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg345"/> was made bishop in
          his stead, and is living at this time, being likewise a man very
          learned in the Holy Scriptures.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Whilst they
          administered the bishopric, it was determined by a synodal decree,
          that the province of the South Saxons, which till that time
          belonged to the diocese of the city of Winchester, where Daniel
          then presided, should itself have an episcopal see, and a bishop of
          its own.<a href="#note_880" id="noteref_880" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">880</span></span></a>
          Eadbert, at that time abbot of the monastery of Bishop Wilfrid, of
          blessed memory, called Selaeseu,<a href="#note_881" id="noteref_881" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">881</span></span></a> was
          consecrated their first bishop. On his death, Eolla succeeded to
          the office of bishop. He also died some years ago, and the
          bishopric has been vacant to this day.<a href="#note_882" id="noteref_882" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">882</span></span></a></p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc289"/> <a id="pdf290"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_V_Chap_XIX"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XIX. How Coinred, king of the
          Mercians, and Offa, king of the East Saxons, ended their days at
          Rome, in the monastic habit; and of the life and death of Bishop
          Wilfrid. [709</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the fourth
          year of the reign of Osred,<a href="#note_883" id="noteref_883" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">883</span></span></a>
          Coenred,<a href="#note_884" id="noteref_884" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">884</span></span></a> who
          had for some time nobly governed the kingdom of the Mercians, much
          more nobly quitted the sceptre of his kingdom. For he went to Rome,
          and there receiving the tonsure and becoming a monk, when
          Constantine<a href="#note_885" id="noteref_885" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">885</span></span></a> was
          pope, he continued to his last hour in prayer and fasting and
          alms-deeds at the threshold of the Apostles. <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page346">[pg 346]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg346"/> He was succeeded in the throne by
          Ceolred,<a href="#note_886" id="noteref_886" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">886</span></span></a> the
          son of Ethelred, who had governed the kingdom before Coenred. With
          him went the son of Sighere,<a href="#note_887" id="noteref_887" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">887</span></span></a> the
          king of the East Saxons whom we mentioned before, by name Offa, a
          youth of a most pleasing age and comeliness, and greatly desired by
          all his nation to have and to hold the sceptre of the kingdom. He,
          with like devotion, quitted wife, and lands, and kindred and
          country, for Christ and for the Gospel, that he might <span class="tei tei-q">“receive an hundred-fold in this life, and in the world
          to come life everlasting.”</span><a href="#note_888" id="noteref_888" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">888</span></span></a> He
          also, when they came to the holy places at Rome, received the
          tonsure, and ending his life in the monastic habit, attained to the
          vision of the blessed Apostles in Heaven, as he had long
          desired.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The same year
          that they departed from Britain, the great bishop, Wilfrid, ended
          his days in the province called Inundalum,<a href="#note_889" id="noteref_889" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">889</span></span></a> after
          he had been bishop forty-five years.<a href="#note_890" id="noteref_890" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">890</span></span></a> His
          body, being laid in a coffin, was carried to his monastery, which
          is called Inhrypum,<a href="#note_891" id="noteref_891" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">891</span></span></a> and
          buried in the church of the blessed Apostle Peter, with the honour
          due to so great a prelate. Concerning whose manner of <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page347">[pg 347]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg347"/> life, let us now turn back, and briefly
          make mention of the things which were done.<a href="#note_892" id="noteref_892" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">892</span></span></a> Being
          a boy of a good disposition, and virtuous beyond his years, he
          conducted himself so modestly and discreetly in all points, that he
          was deservedly beloved, respected, and cherished by his elders as
          one of themselves.<a href="#note_893" id="noteref_893" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">893</span></span></a> At
          fourteen years of age he chose rather the monastic than the secular
          life; which, when he had signified to his father, for his mother
          was dead, he readily consented to his godly wishes and desires, and
          advised him to persist in that wholesome purpose. Wherefore he came
          to the isle of Lindisfarne, and there giving himself to the service
          of the monks, he strove diligently to learn and to practise those
          things which belong to monastic purity and piety; and being of a
          ready wit, he speedily learned the psalms and some other books,
          having not yet received the tonsure, but being in no small measure
          marked by those virtues of humility and obedience which are more
          important than the tonsure; for which reason he was justly loved by
          his elders and his equals. Having served God some years in that
          monastery, and being a youth of a good understanding, he perceived
          that the way of virtue delivered by the Scots was in no wise
          perfect, and he resolved to go to Rome, to see what ecclesiastical
          or monastic rites were in use at the Apostolic see. When he told
          the brethren, they commended his design, and advised him to carry
          out that which he purposed. He forthwith went to Queen Eanfled, for
          he was known to her, and it was by her counsel and support that he
          had been admitted into the aforesaid monastery, and he told her of
          his desire to visit the threshold of the blessed Apostles. She,
          being pleased with the youth's good purpose, sent <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page348">[pg 348]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg348"/> him into Kent, to King
          Earconbert,<a href="#note_894" id="noteref_894" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">894</span></span></a> who
          was her uncle's son, requesting that he would send him to Rome in
          an honourable manner. At that time, Honorius,<a href="#note_895" id="noteref_895" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">895</span></span></a> one
          of the disciples of the blessed Pope Gregory, a man very highly
          instructed in ecclesiastical learning, was archbishop there. When
          he had tarried there for a space, and, being a youth of an active
          spirit, was diligently applying himself to learn those things which
          came under his notice, another youth, called Biscop, surnamed
          Benedict,<a href="#note_896" id="noteref_896" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">896</span></span></a> of
          the English nobility, arrived there, being likewise desirous to go
          to Rome, of whom we have before made mention.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The king gave
          him Wilfrid for a companion, and bade Wilfrid conduct him to Rome.
          When they came to Lyons, Wilfrid was detained there by
          Dalfinus,<a href="#note_897" id="noteref_897" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">897</span></span></a> the
          bishop of that city; but Benedict hastened on to Rome. For the
          bishop was delighted with the youth's prudent discourse, the grace
          of his comely countenance, his eager activity, and the consistency
          and maturity of his thoughts; for which reason he plentifully
          supplied him and his companions with all necessaries, as long as
          they stayed with him; and further offered, if he would have it, to
          commit to him the government of no small part of Gaul, to give him
          a maiden daughter of his own brother<a href="#note_898" id="noteref_898" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">898</span></span></a> to
          wife, and to regard him always as his adopted son. But Wilfrid
          thanked him for the loving-kindness which he was pleased to show to
          a stranger, and answered, that he had resolved upon another course
          of life, and for that reason had left his country and set out for
          Rome.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Hereupon the
          bishop sent him to Rome, furnishing him with a guide and supplying
          plenty of all things requisite for his journey, earnestly
          requesting that he would come that way, when he returned into his
          own <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page349">[pg 349]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg349"/> country. Wilfrid
          arriving at Rome, and daily giving himself with all earnestness to
          prayer and the study of ecclesiastical matters, as he had purposed
          in his mind, gained the friendship of the most holy and learned
          Boniface, the archdeacon,<a href="#note_899" id="noteref_899" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">899</span></span></a> who
          was also counsellor to the Apostolic Pope, by whose instruction he
          learned in their order the four Gospels, and the true computation
          of Easter; and many other things appertaining to ecclesiastical
          discipline, which he could not learn in his own country, he
          acquired from the teaching of that same master. When he had spent
          some months there, in successful study, he returned into Gaul, to
          Dalfinus;<a href="#note_900" id="noteref_900" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">900</span></span></a> and
          having stayed with him three years, received from him the tonsure,
          and Dalfinus esteemed him so highly in love that he had thoughts of
          making him his heir; but this was prevented by the bishop's cruel
          death, and Wilfrid was reserved to be a bishop of his own, that is,
          the English, nation. For Queen Baldhild<a href="#note_901" id="noteref_901" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">901</span></span></a> sent
          soldiers with orders to put the bishop to death; whom Wilfrid, as
          his clerk, attended to the place where he was to be beheaded, being
          very desirous, though the bishop strongly opposed it, to die with
          him; but the executioners, understanding that he was a stranger,
          and of the English nation, spared him, and would not put him to
          death with his bishop.</p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page350">[pg
          350]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg350"/>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Returning to
          Britain, he won the friendship of King Alchfrid,<a href="#note_902" id="noteref_902" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">902</span></span></a> who
          had learnt to follow always and love the catholic rules of the
          Church; and therefore finding him to be a Catholic, he gave him
          presently land of ten families at the place called Stanford;<a href="#note_903" id="noteref_903" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">903</span></span></a> and
          not long after, the monastery, with land of thirty families, at the
          place called Inhrypum;<a href="#note_904" id="noteref_904" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">904</span></span></a> which
          place he had formerly given to those that followed the doctrine of
          the Scots, to build a monastery there. But, forasmuch as they
          afterwards, being given the choice, had rather quit the place than
          adopt the Catholic Easter and other canonical rites, according to
          the custom of the Roman Apostolic Church, he gave the same to him
          whom he found to be instructed in better discipline and better
          customs.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At the same
          time, by the said king's command, he was ordained priest in the
          same monastery, by Agilbert,<a href="#note_905" id="noteref_905" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">905</span></span></a>
          bishop of the Gewissae above-mentioned, the king being desirous
          that a man of so much learning and piety should attend him
          constantly as his special priest and teacher; and not long after,
          when the Scottish sect had been exposed and banished,<a href="#note_906" id="noteref_906" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">906</span></span></a> as
          was said above, he, with the advice and consent of his father Oswy,
          sent him into Gaul, to be consecrated as his bishop,<a href="#note_907" id="noteref_907" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">907</span></span></a> when
          he was about thirty years of age, the same Agilbert being then
          bishop of the city of Paris. Eleven other bishops met at the
          consecration of the new bishop, and that function was most
          honourably performed. Whilst he yet tarried beyond the sea, the
          holy man, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page351">[pg
          351]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg351"/>
          Ceadda,<a href="#note_908" id="noteref_908" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">908</span></span></a> was
          consecrated bishop of York<a href="#note_909" id="noteref_909" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">909</span></span></a> by
          command of King Oswy, as has been said above; and having nobly
          ruled that church three years, he retired to take charge of his
          monastery of Laestingaeu, and Wilfrid was made bishop of all the
          province of the Northumbrians.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Afterwards, in
          the reign of Egfrid, he was expelled from his bishopric, and others
          were consecrated bishops in his stead, of whom mention has been
          made above.<a href="#note_910" id="noteref_910" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">910</span></span></a>
          Designing to go to Rome, to plead his cause before the Apostolic
          Pope, he took ship, and was driven by a west wind into
          Frisland,<a href="#note_911" id="noteref_911" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">911</span></span></a> and
          honourably received by that barbarous people and their King
          Aldgils, to whom he preached Christ, and he instructed many
          thousands of them in the Word of truth, washing them from the
          defilement of their sins in the Saviour's font. Thus he began there
          the work of the Gospel which was afterwards finished with great
          devotion by the most reverend bishop of Christ, Wilbrord.<a href="#note_912" id="noteref_912" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">912</span></span></a>
          Having spent the winter there successfully among this new people of
          God, he set out again on his way to Rome,<a href="#note_913" id="noteref_913" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">913</span></span></a> where
          his cause being <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page352">[pg
          352]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg352"/>
          tried before Pope Agatho and many bishops,<a href="#note_914" id="noteref_914" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">914</span></span></a> he
          was by the judgement of them all acquitted of all blame, and
          declared worthy of his bishopric.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At the same
          time, the said Pope Agatho assembling a synod at Rome, of one
          hundred and twenty-five bishops, against those who asserted that
          there was only one will and operation in our Lord and
          Saviour,<a href="#note_915" id="noteref_915" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">915</span></span></a>
          ordered Wilfrid also to be summoned, and, sitting among the
          bishops, to declare his own faith and the faith of the province or
          island whence he came; and he and his people being found orthodox
          in their faith, it was thought fit to record the same among the
          acts of that synod, which was done in in this manner: <span class="tei tei-q">“Wilfrid, the beloved of God, bishop of the city of
          York, appealing to the Apostolic see, and being by that authority
          acquitted of every thing, whether specified against him or not, and
          being appointed to sit in judgement with one hundred and
          twenty-five other bishops in the synod, made confession of the true
          and catholic faith, and confirmed the same with his subscription in
          the name of all the northern part of Britain and Ireland, and the
          islands inhabited by the nations of the English and Britons, as
          also by the Scots and Picts.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">After this,
          returning into Britain,<a href="#note_916" id="noteref_916" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">916</span></span></a> he
          converted the province of the South Saxons from their idolatrous
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page353">[pg 353]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg353"/> worship to the faith
          of Christ.<a href="#note_917" id="noteref_917" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">917</span></span></a> He
          also sent ministers of the Word to the Isle of Wight;<a href="#note_918" id="noteref_918" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">918</span></span></a> and
          in the second year of Aldfrid, who reigned after Egfrid, was
          restored to his see and bishopric by that king's invitation.<a href="#note_919" id="noteref_919" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">919</span></span></a>
          Nevertheless, five years after, being again accused, he was
          deprived of his bishopric by the same king and certain
          bishops.<a href="#note_920" id="noteref_920" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">920</span></span></a>
          Coming to Rome,<a href="#note_921" id="noteref_921" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">921</span></span></a> he
          was allowed to make his defence in the presence of his accusers,
          before a number of bishops and the Apostolic Pope John.<a href="#note_922" id="noteref_922" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">922</span></span></a> It
          was shown by the judgement of them all, that his accusers had in
          part laid false accusations to his charge; and the aforesaid Pope
          wrote to the kings of the English, Ethelred <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page354">[pg 354]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg354"/> and Aldfrid, to cause him to be
          restored to his bishopric, because he had been unjustly
          condemned.<a href="#note_923" id="noteref_923" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">923</span></span></a></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">His acquittal
          was much forwarded by the reading of the acts of the synod of Pope
          Agatho,<a href="#note_924" id="noteref_924" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">924</span></span></a> of
          blessed memory, which had been formerly held, when Wilfrid was in
          Rome and sat in council among the bishops, as has been said before.
          For the acts of that synod being, as the case required, read, by
          order of the Apostolic Pope, before the nobility and a great number
          of the people for some days, they came to the place where it was
          written, <span class="tei tei-q">“Wilfrid, the beloved of God,
          bishop of the city of York, appealing to the Apostolic see, and
          being by that authority acquitted of everything, whether specified
          against him or not,”</span> and the rest as above stated. This
          being read, the hearers were amazed, and the reader ceasing, they
          began to ask of one another, who that Bishop Wilfrid was. Then
          Boniface, the Pope's counsellor,<a href="#note_925" id="noteref_925" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">925</span></span></a> and
          many others, who had seen him there in the days of Pope Agatho,
          said that he was the same bishop that lately came to Rome, to be
          tried by the Apostolic see, being accused by his people, and
          <span class="tei tei-q">“who, said they, having long since come
          here upon the like accusation, the cause and contention of both
          parties being heard and examined, was proved by Pope Agatho, of
          blessed memory, to have been wrongfully expelled from his
          bishopric, and was held in such honour by him, that he commanded
          him to sit in the council of bishops which he had assembled, as a
          man of untainted faith and an upright mind.”</span> This being
          heard, the Pope and all the rest said, that a man of so great
          authority, who had held the office of a bishop for nearly forty
          years, ought by no means to be condemned, but being altogether
          cleared of the faults laid to his charge, should return home with
          honour.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">When he came to
          Gaul, on his way back to Britain, on a sudden he fell sick, and the
          sickness increasing, he was so weighed down by it, that he could
          not ride, but was <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page355">[pg
          355]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg355"/>
          carried in his bed by the hands of his servants. Being thus come to
          the city of Maeldum,<a href="#note_926" id="noteref_926" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">926</span></span></a> in
          Gaul, he lay four days and nights, as if he had been dead, and only
          by his faint breathing showed that he had any life in him. Having
          continued thus four days, without meat or drink, without speech or
          hearing, at length, on the fifth day, at daybreak, as it were
          awakening out of a deep sleep, he raised himself and sat up, and
          opening his eyes, saw round about him a company of brethren singing
          psalms and weeping. Sighing gently, he asked where Acca,<a href="#note_927" id="noteref_927" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">927</span></span></a> the
          priest, was. This man, straightway being called, came in, and
          seeing him somewhat recovered and able to speak, knelt down, and
          gave thanks to God, with all the brethren there present. When they
          had sat awhile and begun to discourse, with great awe, of the
          judgements of heaven, the bishop bade the rest go out for a time,
          and spoke to the priest, Acca, after this manner:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“A dread vision has even now appeared to me, which I
          would have you hear and keep secret, till I know what God will
          please to do with me. There stood by me a certain one, glorious in
          white raiment, and he told me that he was Michael, the Archangel,
          and said, <span class="tei tei-q">‘I am sent to call you back from
          death: for the Lord has granted you life, through the prayers and
          tears of your disciples and brethren, and the intercession of His
          Blessed Mother Mary, of perpetual virginity; wherefore I tell you,
          that you shall now recover from this sickness; but be ready, for I
          will return and visit you at the end of four years. And when you
          come into your country, you shall recover the greater part of the
          possessions that have been taken from you, and shall end your days
          in peace and quiet.’</span> ”</span> The bishop accordingly
          recovered, whereat all men rejoiced and gave thanks to God, and
          setting forward on his journey, he arrived in Britain.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Having read the
          letters which he brought from the Apostolic Pope, Bertwald, the
          archbishop, and Ethelred,<a href="#note_928" id="noteref_928" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">928</span></span></a>
<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page356">[pg 356]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg356"/> sometime king, but
          then abbot, readily took his part; for the said Ethelred, calling
          to him Coenred,<a href="#note_929" id="noteref_929" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">929</span></span></a> whom
          he had made king in his own stead, begged him to be friends with
          Wilfrid, in which request he prevailed; nevertheless Aldfrid, king
          of the Northumbrians, disdained to receive him. But he died soon
          after,<a href="#note_930" id="noteref_930" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">930</span></span></a> and
          so it came to pass that, during the reign of his son Osred,<a href="#note_931" id="noteref_931" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">931</span></span></a> when
          a synod was assembled before long by the river Nidd,<a href="#note_932" id="noteref_932" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">932</span></span></a> after
          some contention on both sides, at length, by the consent of all, he
          was restored to the government of his own church;<a href="#note_933" id="noteref_933" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">933</span></span></a> and
          thus he lived in peace four years, till the day of his death. He
          died in his monastery, which he had in the province of
          Undalum,<a href="#note_934" id="noteref_934" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">934</span></span></a> under
          the government of the Abbot Cuthbald;<a href="#note_935" id="noteref_935" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">935</span></span></a> and
          by the ministry of the brethren, he was carried to his first
          monastery which is called Inhrypum,<a href="#note_936" id="noteref_936" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">936</span></span></a> and
          buried in the church of the blessed Apostle Peter, hard by the
          altar on the south side, as has been mentioned above, and this
          epitaph was written over him:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Here rests the body of the great Bishop Wilfrid, who,
          for love of piety, built these courts and consecrated them with the
          noble name of Peter, to whom Christ, the Judge of all the earth,
          gave the keys of Heaven. And devoutly he clothed them with gold and
          Tyrian purple; yea, and he placed here the trophy of the Cross, of
          shining ore, uplifted high; moreover he caused the four
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page357">[pg 357]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg357"/> books of the Gospel
          to be written in gold in their order, and he gave a case meet for
          them of ruddy gold. And he also brought the holy season of Easter,
          returning in its course, to accord with the true teaching of the
          catholic rule which the Fathers fixed, and, banishing all doubt and
          error, gave his nation sure guidance in their worship. And in this
          place he gathered a great throng of monks, and with all diligence
          safeguarded the precepts which the Fathers' rule enjoined. And long
          time sore vexed by many a peril at home and abroad, when he had
          held the office of a bishop forty-five years, he passed away and
          with joy departed to the heavenly kingdom. Grant, O Jesus, that the
          flock may follow in the path of the shepherd.”</span></p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc291"/> <a id="pdf292"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_V_Chap_XX"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XX. How Albinus succeeded to
          the godly Abbot Hadrian, and Acca to Bishop Wilfrid. [709</span>
<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The next year
          after the death of the aforesaid father,<a href="#note_937" id="noteref_937" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">937</span></span></a> which
          was the fifth year of King Osred, the most reverend father, Abbot
          Hadrian,<a href="#note_938" id="noteref_938" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">938</span></span></a>
          fellow labourer in the Word of God with Bishop Theodore<a href="#note_939" id="noteref_939" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">939</span></span></a> of
          blessed memory, died, and was buried in the church of the Blessed
          Mother of God, in his own monastery,<a href="#note_940" id="noteref_940" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">940</span></span></a> this
          being the forty-first year after he was sent by Pope Vitalian with
          Theodore, and the thirty-ninth after his arrival in England. Among
          other proofs of his learning, as well as Theodore's, there is this
          testimony, that Albinus,<a href="#note_941" id="noteref_941" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">941</span></span></a> his
          disciple, who succeeded him in the government of his monastery, was
          so well instructed in literary studies, that he had no small
          knowledge of the Greek tongue, and knew the Latin as well as the
          English, which was his native language.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Acca,<a href="#note_942" id="noteref_942" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">942</span></span></a> his
          priest, succeeded Wilfrid in the bishopric of <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page358">[pg 358]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg358"/> the church of Hagustald, being likewise
          a man of zeal and great in noble works in the sight of God and man.
          He enriched the structure of his church, which is dedicated in
          honour of the blessed Apostle Andrew with manifold adornments and
          marvellous workmanship. For he gave all diligence, as he does to
          this day, to procure relics of the blessed Apostles and martyrs of
          Christ from all parts, and to raise altars in their honour in
          separate side-chapels built for the purpose within the walls of the
          same church. Besides which, he industriously gathered the histories
          of their martyrdom, together with other ecclesiastical writings,
          and erected there a large and noble library. He likewise carefully
          provided holy vessels, lamps, and other such things as appertain to
          the adorning of the house of God. He in like manner invited to him
          a notable singer called Maban,<a href="#note_943" id="noteref_943" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">943</span></span></a> who
          had been taught to sing by the successors of the disciples of the
          blessed Pope Gregory in Kent, to instruct himself and his clergy,
          and kept him twelve years, to the end that he might teach such
          Church music as they did not know, and by his teaching restore to
          its former state that which was corrupted either by long use, or
          through neglect. For Bishop Acca himself was a most skilful singer,
          as well as most learned in Holy Writ, sound in the confession of
          the catholic faith, and well versed in the rules of ecclesiastical
          custom; nor does he cease to walk after this manner, till he
          receive the rewards of his pious devotion. For he was brought up
          from boyhood and instructed among the clergy of the most holy and
          beloved of God, Bosa, bishop of York.<a href="#note_944" id="noteref_944" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">944</span></span></a>
          Afterwards, coming to Bishop Wilfrid in the hope of a better plan
          of life, he spent the rest of his days in attendance on him till
          that bishop's death, and going with him to Rome, learned there many
          profitable things concerning the ordinances of the Holy Church,
          which he could not have learned in his own country.</p>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page359">[pg 359]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg359"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc293"/> <a id="pdf294"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_V_Chap_XXI"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XXI. How the Abbot Ceolfrid
          sent master-builders to the King of the Picts to build a church,
          and with them an epistle concerning the Catholic Easter and the
          Tonsure. [710</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At that
          time,<a href="#note_945" id="noteref_945" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">945</span></span></a>
          Naiton, King of the Picts, who inhabit the northern parts of
          Britain, taught by frequent meditation on the ecclesiastical
          writings, renounced the error whereby he and his nation had been
          holden till then, touching the observance of Easter, and brought
          himself and all his people to celebrate the catholic time of our
          Lord's Resurrection. To the end that he might bring this to pass
          with the more ease and greater authority, he sought aid from the
          English, whom he knew to have long since framed their religion
          after the example of the holy Roman Apostolic Church. Accordingly,
          he sent messengers to the venerable Ceolfrid,<a href="#note_946" id="noteref_946" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">946</span></span></a> abbot
          of the monastery of the blessed Apostles, Peter and Paul, which
          stands at the mouth of the river Wear, and near the river Tyne, at
          the place called Ingyruum,<a href="#note_947" id="noteref_947" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">947</span></span></a> which
          he gloriously governed after Benedict,<a href="#note_948" id="noteref_948" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">948</span></span></a> of
          whom we have before spoken; desiring, that he would send him a
          letter of exhortation, by the help of which he might the better
          confute those that presumed to keep Easter out of the due time; as
          also concerning the form and manner of tonsure whereby the clergy
          should be distinguished,<a href="#note_949" id="noteref_949" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">949</span></span></a>
          notwithstanding that he himself had no small knowledge of these
          things. He also prayed to have master-builders sent him to build a
          church of stone in his nation after <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page360">[pg 360]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg360"/> the Roman manner,<a href="#note_950" id="noteref_950" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">950</span></span></a>
          promising to dedicate the same in honour of the blessed chief of
          the Apostles. Moreover, he and all his people, he said, would
          always follow the custom of the holy Roman Apostolic Church, in so
          far as men so distant from the speech and nation of the Romans
          could learn it. The most reverend Abbot Ceolfrid favourably
          receiving his godly desires and requests, sent the builders he
          desired, and likewise the following letter:<a href="#note_951" id="noteref_951" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">951</span></span></a></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">To the most excellent lord, and glorious King
          Naiton, Abbot Ceolfrid, greeting in the Lord.</span></span> We most
          readily and willingly endeavour, according to your desire, to make
          known to you the catholic observance of holy Easter, according to
          what we have learned of the Apostolic see, even as you, most devout
          king, in your godly zeal, have requested of us. For we know, that
          whensoever the lords of this world labour to learn, and to teach
          and to guard the truth, it is a gift of God to his Holy Church. For
          a certain profane writer<a href="#note_952" id="noteref_952" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">952</span></span></a> has
          most truly said, that the world would be most happy if either kings
          were philosophers, or philosophers were kings. Now if a man of this
          world could judge truly of the philosophy of this world, and form a
          right choice concerning the state of this world, how much more is
          it to be desired, and most earnestly to be prayed for by such as
          are citizens of the heavenly country, and strangers and pilgrims in
          this world, that the more powerful any are in the world the more
          they may strive to hearken to the commands of Him who is the
          Supreme Judge, and by their example and authority may teach those
          that are committed to their charge, to keep the same, together with
          themselves.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“There are then three rules given in the Sacred
          Writings, whereby the time of keeping Easter has been appointed for
          us and may in no wise be changed by any authority of man; two
          whereof are divinely established <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page361">[pg 361]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg361"/> in the law of Moses; the third is added in
          the Gospel by reason of the Passion and Resurrection of our Lord.
          For the law enjoined, that the Passover should be kept in the first
          month of the year, and the third week of that month, that is, from
          the fifteenth day to the one-and-twentieth. It is added, by
          Apostolic institution, from the Gospel, that we are to wait for the
          Lord's day in that third week, and to keep the beginning of the
          Paschal season on the same. Which threefold rule whosoever shall
          rightly observe, will never err in fixing the Paschal feast. But if
          you desire to be more plainly and fully informed in all these
          particulars, it is written in Exodus, where the people of Israel,
          being about to be delivered out of Egypt, are commanded to keep the
          first Passover,<a href="#note_953" id="noteref_953" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">953</span></span></a> that
          the Lord spake unto Moses and Aaron, saying, <span class="tei tei-q">‘This month shall be unto you the beginning of months;
          it shall be the first month of the year to you. Speak ye unto all
          the congregation of Israel, saying, In the tenth day of this month
          they shall take to them every man a lamb, according to the house of
          their fathers, a lamb for an house.’</span> And a little
          after,<a href="#note_954" id="noteref_954" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">954</span></span></a>
<span class="tei tei-q">‘And ye shall keep it up until the
          fourteenth day of the same month; and the whole assembly of the
          congregation of Israel shall kill it in the evening.’</span> By
          which words it most plainly appears, that in the Paschal
          observance, though mention is made of the fourteenth day, yet it is
          not commanded that the Passover be kept on that day; but on the
          evening of the fourteenth day, that is, when the fifteenth moon,
          which is the beginning of the third week, appears in the sky, it is
          commanded that the lamb be killed; and that it was the night of the
          fifteenth moon, when the Egyptians were smitten and Israel was
          redeemed from long captivity. He says,<a href="#note_955" id="noteref_955" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">955</span></span></a>
<span class="tei tei-q">‘Seven days shall ye eat unleavened
          bread.’</span> By which words all the third week of that same first
          month is appointed to be a solemn feast. But lest we should think
          that those same seven days were to be reckoned from the fourteenth
          to the twentieth, He forthwith <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page362">[pg 362]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg362"/> adds,<a href="#note_956" id="noteref_956" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">956</span></span></a>
<span class="tei tei-q">‘Even the first day ye shall put away
          leaven out of your houses; for whosoever eateth leavened bread,
          from the first day until the seventh day, that soul shall be cut
          off from Israel;’</span> and so on, till he says,<a href="#note_957" id="noteref_957" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">957</span></span></a>
<span class="tei tei-q">‘For in this selfsame day I will bring your
          army out of the land of Egypt.’</span></span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Thus he calls that the first day of unleavened bread,
          in which he was to bring their army out of Egypt. Now it is
          evident, that they were not brought out of Egypt on the fourteenth
          day, in the evening whereof the lamb was killed, and which is
          properly called the Passover or Phase, but on the fifteenth day, as
          is most plainly written in the book of Numbers:<a href="#note_958" id="noteref_958" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">958</span></span></a>
<span class="tei tei-q">‘and they departed from Rameses on the
          fifteenth day of the first month, on the morrow after the Passover
          the Israelites went out with an high hand.’</span> Thus the seven
          days of unleavened bread, on the first whereof the people of the
          Lord were brought out of Egypt, are to be reckoned from the
          beginning of the third week, as has been said, that is, from the
          fifteenth day of the first month, till the end of the
          one-and-twentieth of the same month. But the fourteenth day is
          named apart from this number, by the title of the Passover, as is
          plainly shown by that which follows in Exodus:<a href="#note_959" id="noteref_959" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">959</span></span></a>
          where, after it is said, <span class="tei tei-q">‘For in this
          self-same day I will bring your army out of the land of
          Egypt;’</span> it is forthwith added, <span class="tei tei-q">‘And
          ye shall observe this day in your generations by an ordinance for
          ever. In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month, ye
          shall eat unleavened bread, until the one-and-twentieth day of the
          month at even. Seven days shall there be no leaven found in your
          houses.’</span> Now, who is there that does not perceive, that
          there are not only seven days, but rather eight, from the
          fourteenth to the one-and-twentieth, if the fourteenth be also
          reckoned in the number? But if, as appears by diligent study of the
          truth of the Scriptures, we reckon from the evening of the
          fourteenth day to the evening of the one-and-twentieth, we shall
          certainly <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page363">[pg
          363]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg363"/>
          find, that, while the Paschal feast begins on the evening of the
          fourteenth day, yet the whole sacred solemnity contains no more
          than only seven nights and as many days. Wherefore the rule which
          we laid down is proved to be true, when we said that the Paschal
          season is to be celebrated in the first month of the year, and the
          third week of the same. For it is in truth the third week, because
          it begins on the evening of the fourteenth day, and ends on the
          evening of the one-and-twentieth.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But since Christ our Passover is sacrificed,<a href="#note_960" id="noteref_960" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">960</span></span></a> and
          has made the Lord's day, which among the ancients was called the
          first day of the week, a solemn day to us for the joy of His
          Resurrection, the Apostolic tradition has included it in the
          Paschal festival; yet has decreed that the time of the legal
          Passover be in no wise anticipated or diminished; but rather
          ordains, that according to the precept of the law, that same first
          month of the year, and the fourteenth day of the same, and the
          evening thereof be awaited. And when this day should chance to fall
          on a Saturday, every man should take to him a lamb, according to
          the house of his fathers, a lamb for an house, and he should kill
          it in the evening, that is, that all the Churches throughout the
          world, making one Catholic Church, should provide Bread and Wine
          for the Mystery of the Flesh and Blood of the spotless Lamb
          <span class="tei tei-q">‘that hath taken away the sins of the
          world;’</span><a href="#note_961" id="noteref_961" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">961</span></span></a> and
          after a fitting solemn service of lessons and prayers and Paschal
          ceremonies, they should offer up these to the Lord, in hope of
          redemption to come. For this is that same night in which the people
          of Israel were delivered out of Egypt by the blood of the lamb;
          this is the same in which all the people of God were, by Christ's
          Resurrection, set free from eternal death. Then, in the morning,
          when the Lord's day dawns, they should celebrate the first day of
          the Paschal festival; for that is the day on which our Lord made
          known the glory of His Resurrection to His disciples, to their
          manifold joy at the merciful revelation. <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page364">[pg 364]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg364"/> The same is the first day of unleavened
          bread, concerning which it is plainly written in Leviticus,<a href="#note_962" id="noteref_962" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">962</span></span></a>
<span class="tei tei-q">‘In the fourteenth day of the first month,
          at even, is the Lord's Passover. And on the fifteenth day of the
          same month is the feast of unleavened bread unto the Lord; seven
          days ye must eat unleavened bread. In the first day ye shall have
          an holy convocation.’</span></span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“If therefore it could be that the Lord's day should
          always happen on the fifteenth day of the first month, that is, on
          the fifteenth moon, we might always celebrate the Passover at one
          and the same time with the ancient people of God, though the nature
          of the mystery be different, as we do it with one and the same
          faith. But inasmuch as the day of the week does not keep pace
          exactly with the moon, the Apostolic tradition, which was preached
          at Rome by the blessed Peter, and confirmed at Alexandria by Mark
          the Evangelist,<a href="#note_963" id="noteref_963" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">963</span></span></a> his
          interpreter, appointed that when the first month was come, and in
          it the evening of the fourteenth day, we should also wait for the
          Lord's day, between the fifteenth and the one-and-twentieth day of
          the same month. For on whichever of those days it shall fall,
          Easter will be rightly kept on the same; seeing that it is one of
          those seven days on which the feast of unleavened bread is
          commanded to be kept. Thus it comes to pass that our Easter never
          falls either before or after the third week of the first month, but
          has for its observance either the whole of it, to wit, the seven
          days of unleavened bread appointed by the law, or at least some of
          them. For though it comprises but one of them, that is, the
          seventh, which the Scripture so highly commends, saying,<a href="#note_964" id="noteref_964" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">964</span></span></a>
<span class="tei tei-q">‘But the seventh day shall be a more holy
          convocation, ye shall do no servile work therein,’</span> none can
          lay it to our charge, that we do not rightly keep Easter Sunday,
          which we received <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page365">[pg
          365]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg365"/>
          from the Gospel, in the third week of the first month, as the Law
          prescribes.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“The catholic reason of this observance being thus
          explained, the unreasonable error, on the other hand, of those who,
          without any necessity, presume either to anticipate, or to go
          beyond the term appointed in the Law, is manifest. For they that
          think Easter Sunday is to be observed from the fourteenth day of
          the first month till the twentieth moon, anticipate the time
          prescribed in the law, without any necessary reason; for when they
          begin to celebrate the vigil of the holy night from the evening of
          the thirteenth day, it is plain that they make that day the
          beginning of their Easter, whereof they find no mention in the
          commandment of the Law; and when they avoid celebrating our Lord's
          Easter on the one-and-twentieth day of the month, it is surely
          manifest that they wholly exclude that day from their solemnity,
          which the Law many times commends to be observed as a greater
          festival than the rest; and thus, perverting the proper order, they
          sometimes keep Easter Day entirely in the second week, and never
          place it on the seventh day of the third week. And again, they who
          think that Easter is to be kept from the sixteenth day of the said
          month till the two-and-twentieth<a href="#note_965" id="noteref_965" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">965</span></span></a> no
          less erroneously, though on the other side, deviate from the right
          way of truth, and as it were avoiding shipwreck on Scylla, they
          fall into the whirlpool of Charybdis to be drowned. For when they
          teach that Easter is to be begun at the rising of the sixteenth
          moon of the first month, that is, from the evening of the fifteenth
          day, it is certain that they altogether exclude from their
          solemnity the fourteenth day of the same month, which the Law first
          and chiefly commends; so that they scarce touch the evening of the
          fifteenth day, on which the people of God were redeemed from
          Egyptian bondage, and on which our Lord, by His Blood, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page366">[pg 366]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg366"/> rescued the world from the darkness of
          sin, and on which being also buried, He gave us the hope of a
          blessed rest after death.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And these men, receiving in themselves the recompense
          of their error, when they place Easter Sunday on the twenty-second
          day of the month, openly transgress and do violence to the term of
          Easter appointed by the Law, seeing that they begin Easter on the
          evening of that day in which the Law commanded it to be completed
          and brought to an end; and appoint that to be the first day of
          Easter, whereof no mention is any where found in the Law, to wit,
          the first of the fourth week. And both sorts are mistaken, not only
          in fixing and computing the moon's age, but also sometimes in
          finding the first month; but this controversy is longer than can be
          or ought to be contained in this letter. I will only say thus much,
          that by the vernal equinox, it may always be found, without the
          chance of an error, which must be the first month of the year,
          according to the lunar computation, and which the last. But the
          equinox, according to the opinion of all the Eastern nations, and
          particularly of the Egyptians,<a href="#note_966" id="noteref_966" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">966</span></span></a> who
          surpass all other learned men in calculation, falls on the
          twenty-first day of March, as we also prove by horological
          observation. Whatsoever moon therefore is at the full before the
          equinox, being on the fourteenth or fifteenth day, the same belongs
          to the last month of the foregoing year, and consequently is not
          meet for the celebration of Easter; but that moon which is full
          after the equinox, or at the very time of the equinox, belongs to
          the first month, and on that day, without a doubt, we must
          understand that the ancients were wont to celebrate the Passover;
          and that we also ought to keep Easter when the Sunday comes. And
          that this must be so, there is this cogent reason. It is written in
          Genesis,<a href="#note_967" id="noteref_967" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">967</span></span></a>
<span class="tei tei-q">‘And God made two great lights; the greater
          light to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the
          night.’</span> Or, as another edition<a href="#note_968" id="noteref_968" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">968</span></span></a> has
          it, <span class="tei tei-q">‘The greater light to begin the day,
          and the lesser to <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page367">[pg
          367]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg367"/>
          begin the night.’</span> As, therefore, the sun, coming forth from
          the midst of the east, fixed the vernal equinox by his rising, and
          afterwards the moon at the full, when the sun set in the evening,
          followed from the midst of the east; so every year the same first
          lunar month must be observed in the like order, so that its full
          moon must not be before the equinox; but either on the very day of
          the equinox, as it was in the beginning, or after it is past. But
          if the full moon shall happen to be but one day before the time of
          the equinox, the aforesaid reason proves that such moon is not to
          be assigned to the first month of the new year, but rather to the
          last of the preceding, and that it is therefore not meet for the
          celebration of the Paschal festival.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Now if it please you likewise to hear the mystical
          reason in this matter, we are commanded to keep Easter in the first
          month of the year, which is also called the month of new things,
          because we ought to celebrate the mysteries of our Lord's
          Resurrection and our deliverance, with the spirit of our minds
          renewed to the love of heavenly things. We are commanded to keep it
          in the third week of the same month, because Christ Himself, who
          had been promised before the Law, and under the Law, came with
          grace, in the third age of the world, to be sacrificed as our
          Passover; and because rising from the dead the third day after the
          offering of His Passion, He wished this to be called the Lord's
          day, and the Paschal feast of His Resurrection to be yearly
          celebrated on the same; because, also, we do then only truly
          celebrate His solemn festival, if we endeavour with Him to keep the
          Passover, that is, the passing from this world to the Father, by
          faith, hope, and charity. We are commanded to observe the full moon
          of the Paschal month after the vernal equinox, to the end, that the
          sun may first make the day longer than the night, and then the moon
          may show to the world her full orb of light; inasmuch as first
          <span class="tei tei-q">‘the Sun of righteousness, with healing in
          His wings,’</span><a href="#note_969" id="noteref_969" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">969</span></span></a> that
          is, our Lord Jesus, by the triumph of His Resurrection,
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page368">[pg 368]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg368"/> dispelled all the
          darkness of death, and so ascending into Heaven, filled His Church,
          which is often signified by the name of the moon, with the light of
          inward grace, by sending down upon her His Spirit. Which order of
          our salvation the prophet had in his mind, when he said
          <span class="tei tei-q">‘The sun was exalted and the moon stood in
          her order.’</span></span><a href="#note_970" id="noteref_970" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">970</span></span></a></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“He, therefore, who shall contend that the full Paschal
          moon can happen before the equinox, disagrees with the doctrine of
          the Holy Scriptures, in the celebration of the greatest mysteries,
          and agrees with those who trust that they may be saved without the
          grace of Christ preventing them,<a href="#note_971" id="noteref_971" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">971</span></span></a> and
          who presume to teach that they might have attained to perfect
          righteousness, though the true Light had never by death and
          resurrection vanquished the darkness of the world. Thus, after the
          rising of the sun at the equinox, and after the full moon of the
          first month following in her order, that is, after the end of the
          fourteenth day of the same month, all which we have received by the
          Law to be observed, we still, as we are taught in the Gospel, wait
          in the third week for the Lord's day; and so, at length, we
          celebrate the offering of our Easter solemnity, to show that we are
          not, with the ancients, doing honour to the casting off of the yoke
          of Egyptian bondage; but that, with devout faith and love, we
          worship the Redemption of the whole world, which having been
          prefigured in the deliverance of the ancient people of God, was
          fulfilled in Christ's Resurrection, and that we may signify that we
          rejoice in the sure and certain hope of our own resurrection, which
          we believe will likewise happen on the Lord's day.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Now this computation of Easter, which we set forth to
          you to be followed, is contained in a cycle of nineteen years,
          which began long since to be observed in the Church, to wit, even
          in the time of the Apostles, especially at Rome and in Egypt, as
          has been said above.<a href="#note_972" id="noteref_972" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">972</span></span></a>
<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page369">[pg 369]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg369"/> But by the industry
          of Eusebius,<a href="#note_973" id="noteref_973" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">973</span></span></a> who
          took his surname from the blessed martyr Pamphilus,<a href="#note_974" id="noteref_974" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">974</span></span></a> it
          was reduced to a plainer system; insomuch that what till then used
          to be enjoined every year throughout all the Churches by the Bishop
          of Alexandria, might, from that time forward, be most easily known
          by all men, the occurrence of the fourteenth moon being regularly
          set forth in its course. This Paschal computation,
          Theophilus,<a href="#note_975" id="noteref_975" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">975</span></span></a>
          Bishop of Alexandria, made for the Emperor Theodosius, for a
          hundred years to come. Cyril<a href="#note_976" id="noteref_976" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">976</span></span></a> also,
          his successor, comprised a series of ninety-five years in five
          cycles of nineteen years. After whom, Dionysius Exiguus<a href="#note_977" id="noteref_977" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">977</span></span></a> added
          as many more, in order, after the same manner, reaching down to our
          own time. The expiration of these is now drawing near, but there is
          at the present day so great a number of calculators, that even in
          our Churches throughout Britain, there are many who, having learned
          the ancient rules of the Egyptians, can with great ease carry on
          the Paschal cycles for any length of time, even to five hundred and
          <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page370">[pg 370]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg370"/> thirty-two
          years,<a href="#note_978" id="noteref_978" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">978</span></span></a> if
          they will; after the expiration of which, all that appertains to
          the succession of sun and moon, month and week, returns in the same
          order as before. We therefore forbear to send you these same cycles
          of the times to come, because, desiring only to be instructed
          respecting the reason for the Paschal time, you show that you have
          enough of those catholic cycles concerning Easter.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But having said thus much briefly and succinctly, as
          you required, concerning Easter, I also exhort you to take heed
          that the tonsure, concerning which likewise you desired me to write
          to you, be in accordance with the use of the Church and the
          Christian Faith. And we know indeed that the Apostles were not all
          shorn after the same manner, nor does the Catholic Church now, as
          it agrees in one faith, hope, and charity towards God, use one and
          the same form of tonsure throughout the world. Moreover, to look
          back to former times, to wit, the times of the patriarchs, Job, the
          pattern of patience, when tribulation came upon him, shaved his
          head,<a href="#note_979" id="noteref_979" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">979</span></span></a> and
          thus made it appear that he had used, in time of prosperity, to let
          his hair grow. But concerning Joseph, who more than other men
          practised and taught chastity, humility, piety, and the other
          virtues, we read that he was shorn when he was to be delivered from
          bondage,<a href="#note_980" id="noteref_980" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">980</span></span></a> by
          which it appears, that during the time of his bondage, he was in
          the prison with unshorn hair. Behold then how each of these men of
          God differed in the manner of their appearance abroad, though their
          inward consciences agreed in a like grace of virtue. But though we
          may be free to confess, that the difference of tonsure is not
          hurtful to those whose faith is pure towards God, and their charity
          sincere towards their neighbour, especially since we do not read
          that there was ever any controversy among the Catholic fathers
          about the difference of tonsure, as there has been a contention
          about the diversity in keeping Easter, and in matters of faith;
          nevertheless, among all the forms of tonsure that are to be found
          in <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page371">[pg 371]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg371"/> the Church, or among
          mankind at large, I think none more meet to be followed and
          received by us than that which that disciple wore on his head, to
          whom, after his confession of Himself, our Lord said,<a href="#note_981" id="noteref_981" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">981</span></span></a>
<span class="tei tei-q">‘Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will
          build My Church, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against
          it, and I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of
          Heaven.’</span> Nor do I think that any is more rightly to be
          abhorred and detested by all the faithful, than that which that man
          used, to whom that same Peter, when he would have bought the grace
          of the Holy Ghost, said,<a href="#note_982" id="noteref_982" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">982</span></span></a>
<span class="tei tei-q">‘Thy money perish with thee, because thou
          hast thought that the gift of God may be purchased with money. Thou
          hast neither part nor lot in this word.’</span> Nor do we shave
          ourselves in the form of a crown only because Peter was so shorn;
          but because Peter was so shorn in memory of the Passion of our
          Lord, therefore we also, who desire to be saved by the same
          Passion, do with him bear the sign of the same Passion on the top
          of our head, which is the highest part of our body. For as all the
          Church, because it was made a Church by the death of Him that gave
          it life, is wont to bear the sign of His Holy Cross on the
          forehead, to the end, that it may, by the constant protection of
          His banner, be defended from the assaults of evil spirits, and by
          the frequent admonition of the same be taught, in like manner, to
          crucify the flesh with its affections and lusts;<a href="#note_983" id="noteref_983" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">983</span></span></a> so
          also it behoves those, who having either taken the vows of a monk,
          or having the degree of a clerk, must needs curb themselves the
          more strictly by continence, for the Lord's sake, to bear each one
          of them on his head, by the tonsure, the form of the crown of
          thorns which He bore on His head in His Passion, that He might bear
          the thorns and thistles of our sins, that is, that he might bear
          them away and take them from us; to the end that they may show on
          their foreheads that they also willingly, and readily, endure all
          scoffing and <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page372">[pg
          372]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg372"/>
          reproach for his sake; and that they may signify that they await
          always <span class="tei tei-q">‘the crown of eternal life, which
          God hath promised to them that love him,’</span><a href="#note_984" id="noteref_984" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">984</span></span></a> and
          that for the sake of attaining thereto they despise both the evil
          and the good of this world. But as for the tonsure which Simon
          Magus is said to have used, who is there of the faithful, I ask
          you, who does not straightway detest and reject it at the first
          sight of it, together with his magic? Above the forehead it does
          seem indeed to resemble a crown; but when you come to look at the
          neck, you will find the crown cut short which you thought you saw;
          so that you may perceive that such a use properly belongs not to
          Christians but to Simoniacs, such as were indeed in this life by
          erring men thought worthy of the glory of an everlasting crown; but
          in that which is to follow this life are not only deprived of all
          hope of a crown, but are moreover condemned to eternal
          punishment.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But do not think that I have said thus much, as though
          I judged them worthy to be condemned who use this tonsure, if they
          uphold the catholic unity by their faith and works; nay, I
          confidently declare, that many of them have been holy men and
          worthy servants of God. Of which number is Adamnan,<a href="#note_985" id="noteref_985" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">985</span></span></a> the
          notable abbot and priest of the followers of Columba, who, when
          sent on a mission by his nation to King Aldfrid, desired to see our
          monastery, and forasmuch as he showed wonderful wisdom, humility,
          and piety in his words and behaviour, I said to him among other
          things, when I talked with him, <span class="tei tei-q">‘I beseech
          you, holy brother, how is it that you, who believe that you are
          advancing to the crown of life, which knows no end, wear on your
          head, after a fashion ill-suited to your belief, the likeness of a
          crown that has an end? And if you seek the fellowship of the
          blessed Peter, why do you imitate the likeness of the tonsure of
          him whom St. Peter anathematized? and why do you not rather even
          now show that you choose with <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page373">[pg 373]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg373"/> all your heart the fashion of him with whom
          you desire to live in bliss for ever.’</span> He answered,
          <span class="tei tei-q">‘Be assured, my dear brother, that though I
          wear the tonsure of Simon, according to the custom of my country,
          yet I detest and abhor with all my soul the heresy of Simon; and I
          desire, as far as lies in my small power, to follow the footsteps
          of the most blessed chief of the Apostles.’</span> I replied,
          <span class="tei tei-q">‘I verily believe it; nevertheless it is a
          token that you embrace in your inmost heart whatever is of Peter
          the Apostle, if you also observe in outward form that which you
          know to be his. For I think your wisdom easily discerns that it is
          much better to estrange from your countenance, already dedicated to
          God, the fashion of his countenance whom with all your heart you
          abhor, and of whose hideous face you would shun the sight; and, on
          the other hand, that it beseems you to imitate the manner of his
          appearance, whom you seek to have for your advocate before God,
          even as you desire to follow his actions and his
          teaching.’</span></span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“This I said at that time to Adamnan, who indeed showed
          how much he had profited by seeing the ordinances of our Churches,
          when, returning into Scotland,<a href="#note_986" id="noteref_986" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">986</span></span></a> he
          afterwards by his preaching led great numbers of that nation to the
          catholic observance of the Paschal time; though he was not yet able
          to bring back to the way of the better ordinance the monks that
          lived in the island of Hii over whom he presided with the special
          authority of a superior. He would also have been mindful to amend
          the tonsure, if his influence had availed so far.</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But I now also admonish your wisdom, O king, that
          together with the nation, over which the King of kings, and Lord of
          lords, has placed you, you strive to observe in all points those
          things which are in accord with the unity of the Catholic and
          Apostolic Church; for so it will come to pass, that after you have
          held sway in a temporal kingdom, the blessed chief of the Apostles
          will also willingly open to you and yours with all the elect the
          entrance into the heavenly kingdom. The grace of <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page374">[pg 374]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg374"/> the eternal King preserve you in
          safety, long reigning for the peace of us all, my dearly beloved
          son in Christ.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">This letter
          having been read in the presence of King Naiton and many learned
          men, and carefully interpreted into his own language by those who
          could understand it, he is said to have much rejoiced at the
          exhortation thereof; insomuch that, rising from among his nobles
          that sat about him, he knelt on the ground, giving thanks to God
          that he had been found worthy to receive such a gift from the land
          of the English. <span class="tei tei-q">“And indeed,”</span> he
          said, <span class="tei tei-q">“I knew before, that this was the
          true celebration of Easter, but now I so fully learn the reason for
          observing this time, that I seem in all points to have known but
          little before concerning these matters. Therefore I publicly
          declare and protest to you that are here present, that I will for
          ever observe this time of Easter, together with all my nation; and
          I do decree that this tonsure, which we have heard to be
          reasonable, shall be received by all clerks in my kingdom.”</span>
          Without delay he accomplished by his royal authority what he had
          said. For straightway the Paschal cycles of nineteen years were
          sent by command of the State throughout all the provinces of the
          Picts to be transcribed, learned, and observed, the erroneous
          cycles of eighty-four years being everywhere blotted out.<a href="#note_987" id="noteref_987" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">987</span></span></a> All
          the ministers of the altar and monks were shorn after the fashion
          of the crown; and the nation thus reformed, rejoiced, as being
          newly put under the guidance of Peter, the most blessed chief of
          the Apostles, and committed to his protection.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc295"/> <a id="pdf296"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_V_Chap_XXII"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XXII. How the monks of Hii, and
          the monasteries subject to them, began to celebrate the canonical
          Easter at the preaching of Egbert. [716</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Not long after,
          those monks also of the Scottish nation, who lived in the isle of
          Hii, with the other monasteries that were subject to them, were by
          the Lord's doing brought <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page375">[pg
          375]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg375"/>
          to the canonical observance with regard to Easter, and the tonsure.
          For in the year of our Lord 716, when Osred<a href="#note_988" id="noteref_988" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">988</span></span></a> was
          slain, and Coenred<a href="#note_989" id="noteref_989" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">989</span></span></a> took
          upon him the government of the kingdom of the Northumbrians, the
          father and priest,<a href="#note_990" id="noteref_990" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">990</span></span></a>
          Egbert, beloved of God, and worthy to be named with all honour,
          whom we have before often mentioned, came to them from Ireland, and
          was honourably and joyfully received. Being a most gracious
          teacher, and most devout in practising those things which he
          taught, and being willingly heard by all, by his pious and diligent
          exhortations, he converted them from that deep-rooted tradition of
          their fathers, of whom may be said those words of the Apostle,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“That they had a zeal of God, but not
          according to knowledge.”</span><a href="#note_991" id="noteref_991" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">991</span></span></a> He
          taught them to celebrate the principal solemnity after the catholic
          and apostolic manner, as has been said, wearing on their heads the
          figure of an unending crown.<a href="#note_992" id="noteref_992" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">992</span></span></a> It is
          manifest that this came to pass by a wonderful dispensation of the
          Divine goodness; to the end, that the same nation which had
          willingly, and without grudging, taken heed to impart to the
          English people that learning which it had in the knowledge of God,
          should afterwards, by means of the English nation, be brought, in
          those things which it had not, to a perfect rule of life. Even as,
          contrarywise, the Britons, who <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page376">[pg 376]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg376"/> would not reveal to the English the knowledge
          which they had of the Christian faith, now, when the English people
          believe, and are in all points instructed in the rule of the
          Catholic faith, still persist in their errors, halting and turned
          aside from the true path, expose their heads without a crown, and
          keep the Feast of Christ apart from the fellowship of the Church of
          Christ.<a href="#note_993" id="noteref_993" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">993</span></span></a></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The monks of
          Hii, at the teaching of Egbert, adopted the catholic manner of
          conversation, under Abbot Dunchad, about eighty years after they
          had sent Bishop Aidan to preach to the English nation.<a href="#note_994" id="noteref_994" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">994</span></span></a> The
          man of God, Egbert, remained thirteen years in the aforesaid
          island, which he had thus consecrated to Christ, as it were, by a
          new ray of the grace of fellowship and peace in the Church; and in
          the year of our Lord 729, in which Easter was celebrated on the
          24th of April, when he had celebrated the solemnity of the Mass, in
          memory of the Resurrection of our Lord, that same day he departed
          to the Lord and thus finished, or rather never ceases endlessly to
          celebrate, with our Lord, and the Apostles, and the other citizens
          of heaven, the joy of that greatest festival, which he had begun
          with the brethren, whom he had converted to the grace of unity. And
          it was a wonderful dispensation of the Divine Providence, that the
          venerable man passed from this world to the Father, not only at
          Easter, but also when Easter was celebrated on that day,<a href="#note_995" id="noteref_995" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">995</span></span></a> on
          which it had never been wont to be celebrated in those parts. The
          brethren rejoiced in the sure and catholic knowledge of the time of
          Easter, and were glad in that their father, by whom they had been
          brought into the right way, passing hence to the Lord should plead
          for them. He also gave thanks that he had so long continued in the
          flesh, till he saw his hearers accept and <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page377">[pg 377]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg377"/> keep with him as Easter that day which they
          had ever before avoided. Thus the most reverend father being
          assured of their amendment, rejoiced to see the day of the Lord,
          and he saw it and was glad.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc297"/> <a id="pdf298"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_V_Chap_XXIII"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XXIII. Of the present state of
          the English nation, or of all Britain. [725-731</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year of
          our Lord 725, being the seventh year of Osric,<a href="#note_996" id="noteref_996" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">996</span></span></a> king
          of the Northumbrians, who had succeeded Coenred, Wictred,<a href="#note_997" id="noteref_997" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">997</span></span></a> the
          son of Egbert, king of Kent, died on the 23rd of April, and left
          his three sons, Ethelbert, Eadbert, and Alric,<a href="#note_998" id="noteref_998" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">998</span></span></a> heirs
          of that kingdom, which he had governed thirty-four years and a
          half. The next year Tobias,<a href="#note_999" id="noteref_999" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">999</span></span></a>
          bishop of the church of Rochester, died, a most learned man, as has
          been said before; for he was disciple to those masters of blessed
          memory, Theodore, the archbishop, and Abbot Hadrian, wherefore, as
          has been said, besides having a great knowledge of letters both
          ecclesiastical and general, he learned both the Greek and Latin
          tongues to such perfection, that they were as well known and
          familiar to him as his native language. He was buried in the chapel
          of St. Paul the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page378">[pg
          378]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg378"/>
          Apostle, which he had built within the church of St. Andrew<a href="#note_1000" id="noteref_1000" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1000</span></span></a> for
          his own place of burial. After him Aldwulf<a href="#note_1001" id="noteref_1001" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1001</span></span></a> took
          upon him the office of bishop, having been consecrated by
          Archbishop Bertwald.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year of
          our Lord 729, two comets appeared about the sun, to the great
          terror of the beholders. One of them went before the sun in the
          morning at his rising, the other followed him when he set in the
          evening, as it were presaging dire disaster to both east and west;
          or without doubt one was the forerunner of the day, and the other
          of the night, to signify that mortals were threatened with
          calamities at both times. They carried their flaming brands towards
          the north, as it were ready to kindle a conflagration. They
          appeared in January, and continued nearly a fortnight. At which
          time a grievous blight fell upon Gaul, in that it was laid waste by
          the Saracens with cruel bloodshed; but not long after in that
          country they received the due reward of their unbelief.<a href="#note_1002" id="noteref_1002" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1002</span></span></a> In
          that year the holy man of God, Egbert, departed to the Lord, as has
          been said above, on Easter day;<a href="#note_1003" id="noteref_1003" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1003</span></span></a> and
          immediately after Easter, that is, on the 9th of May, Osric,<a href="#note_1004" id="noteref_1004" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1004</span></span></a> king
          of the Northumbrians, departed this life, after he had reigned
          eleven years, and appointed Ceolwulf,<a href="#note_1005" id="noteref_1005" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1005</span></span></a>
          brother to Coenred,<a href="#note_1006" id="noteref_1006" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1006</span></span></a> who
          had reigned before him, his successor; the beginning and progress
          of whose reign have been so filled with many and great commotions
          and conflicts, that it cannot yet be known what is to be said
          concerning them, or what end they will have.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year of
          our Lord 731, Archbishop Bertwald died of old age, on the 13th of
          January, having held his <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page379">[pg
          379]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg379"/>
          see thirty-seven years, six months and fourteen days.<a href="#note_1007" id="noteref_1007" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1007</span></span></a> In
          his stead, the same year, Tatwine,<a href="#note_1008" id="noteref_1008" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1008</span></span></a> of
          the province of the Mercians, was made archbishop, having been a
          priest in the monastery called Briudun.<a href="#note_1009" id="noteref_1009" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1009</span></span></a> He
          was consecrated in the city of Canterbury by the venerable men,
          Daniel,<a href="#note_1010" id="noteref_1010" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1010</span></span></a>
          bishop of Winchester, Ingwald of London,<a href="#note_1011" id="noteref_1011" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1011</span></span></a>
          Aldwin of Lichfield,<a href="#note_1012" id="noteref_1012" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1012</span></span></a> and
          Aldwulf of Rochester,<a href="#note_1013" id="noteref_1013" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1013</span></span></a> on
          Sunday, the 10th of June, being a man renowned for piety and
          wisdom, and of notable learning in Holy Scripture.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Thus at the
          present time,<a href="#note_1014" id="noteref_1014" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1014</span></span></a> the
          bishops Tatwine and <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page380">[pg
          380]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg380"/>
          Aldwulf preside in the churches of Kent; Ingwald is bishop in the
          province of the East Saxons. In the province of the East Angles,
          the bishops are Aldbert and Hadulac;<a href="#note_1015" id="noteref_1015" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1015</span></span></a> in
          the province of the West Saxons, Daniel and Forthere;<a href="#note_1016" id="noteref_1016" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1016</span></span></a> in
          the province of the Mercians, Aldwin.<a href="#note_1017" id="noteref_1017" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1017</span></span></a>
          Among those peoples who dwell beyond the river Severn to the
          westward,<a href="#note_1018" id="noteref_1018" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1018</span></span></a>
          Walhstod is bishop; in the province of the Hwiccas, Wilfrid;<a href="#note_1019" id="noteref_1019" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1019</span></span></a> in
          the province of Lindsey, Bishop Cynibert<a href="#note_1020" id="noteref_1020" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1020</span></span></a>
          presides; the bishopric of the Isle of Wight<a href="#note_1021" id="noteref_1021" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1021</span></span></a>
          belongs to Daniel, bishop of the city of Winchester. The province
          of the South Saxons,<a href="#note_1022" id="noteref_1022" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1022</span></span></a>
          having now continued some years without a bishop, receives
          episcopal ministrations from the prelate of the West Saxons. All
          these provinces, and the other southern provinces, as far as the
          boundary formed by the river Humber, with their several kings, are
          subject to King Ethelbald.<a href="#note_1023" id="noteref_1023" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1023</span></span></a></p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page381">[pg 381]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg381"/>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But in the
          province of the Northumbrians, where King Ceolwulf reigns, four
          bishops now preside; Wilfrid<a href="#note_1024" id="noteref_1024" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1024</span></span></a> in
          the church of York, Ethelwald<a href="#note_1025" id="noteref_1025" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1025</span></span></a> in
          that of Lindisfarne, Acca<a href="#note_1026" id="noteref_1026" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1026</span></span></a> in
          that of Hagustald, Pecthelm<a href="#note_1027" id="noteref_1027" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1027</span></span></a> in
          that which is called the White House, which, as the number of the
          faithful has increased, has lately become an episcopal see, and has
          him for its first prelate. The Pictish people also at this time are
          at peace with the English nation, and rejoice in having their part
          in Catholic peace and truth with the universal Church. The
          Scots<a href="#note_1028" id="noteref_1028" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1028</span></span></a> that
          inhabit Britain, content with their own territories, devise no
          plots nor hostilities against the English nation. The
          Britons,<a href="#note_1029" id="noteref_1029" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1029</span></span></a>
          though they, for the most part, as a nation hate and oppose the
          English nation, and wrongfully, and from wicked lewdness, set
          themselves against the appointed Easter of the whole Catholic
          Church; yet, inasmuch as both Divine and human power withstand
          them, they can in neither purpose prevail as they desire; for
          though in part they are their own masters, yet part of them are
          brought under subjection to the English. In these favourable times
          of peace and calm,<a href="#note_1030" id="noteref_1030" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1030</span></span></a> many
          of the Northumbrians, as well of the nobility as private persons,
          laying aside their weapons, and receiving the tonsure, desire
          rather both for themselves and their children to take upon them
          monastic vows, than to practise the pursuit of war. What will be
          the end hereof, the next age will see. This is for the present the
          state <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page382">[pg 382]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg382"/> of all Britain;
          about two hundred and eighty-five years after the coming of the
          English into Britain, and in the 731st year of our Lord, in Whose
          kingdom that shall have no end let the earth rejoice; and Britain
          being one with them in the joy of His faith, let the multitude of
          isles be glad, and give thanks at the remembrance of His
          holiness.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc299"/> <a id="pdf300"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_V_Chap_XXIV"/>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XXIV. Chronological
          recapitulation of the whole work: also concerning the author
          himself.</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">I have thought
          fit briefly to sum up those things which have been related at
          length under their particular dates, that they may be the better
          kept in memory.<a href="#note_1031" id="noteref_1031" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1031</span></span></a></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the sixtieth
          year before the Incarnation of our Lord, Caius Julius Cæsar, first
          of the Romans invaded Britain, and was victorious, yet could not
          maintain the supreme power there. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_II">I, 2</a>.]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year of
          our Lord, 46, Claudius, being the second of the Romans who came to
          Britain, received the surrender of a great part of the island, and
          added the Orkney islands to the Roman empire. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_III">I, 3</a>.]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year of
          our Lord 167, Eleuther, being made bishop at Rome, governed the
          Church most gloriously fifteen years.<a href="#note_1032" id="noteref_1032" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1032</span></span></a> To
          whom Lucius, king of Britain, sent a letter, asking to be made a
          Christian, and succeeded in obtaining his request. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_IV">I, 4</a>.]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year of
          our Lord 189, Severus, being made emperor, reigned seventeen years;
          he fortified Britain with a rampart from sea to sea. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_V">I, 5</a>.]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 381,
          Maximus, being made emperor in Britain, crossed over into Gaul, and
          slew Gratian. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_IX">I,
          9</a>.]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 409,
          Rome was overthrown by the Goths, from which time the Romans ceased
          to rule in Britain. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XI">I, 11</a>.]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 430,
          Palladius was sent by Pope Celestine <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page383">[pg 383]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg383"/> to the Scots that believed in Christ to be
          their first bishop. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XIII">I, 13</a>.]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 449,
          Marcian being made emperor with Valentinian, reigned seven years;
          in whose time the English, being called in by the Britons, came
          into Britain. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XV">I,
          15</a>.]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 538,
          an eclipse of the sun came to pass on the 16th of February, from
          the first hour until the third.<a href="#note_1033" id="noteref_1033" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1033</span></span></a></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 540,
          an eclipse of the sun came to pass on the 20th of June, and the
          stars appeared during almost half an hour after the third hour of
          the day.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 547,
          Ida<a href="#note_1034" id="noteref_1034" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1034</span></span></a>
          began to reign; he was the founder of the royal family of the
          Northumbrians, and he reigned twelve years.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 565,
          the priest, Columba, came out of Scotland,<a href="#note_1035" id="noteref_1035" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1035</span></span></a> into
          Britain, to teach the Picts, and he built a monastery in the isle
          of Hii. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_IV">III,
          4</a>.]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 596,
          Pope Gregory sent Augustine with monks into Britain, to preach the
          good tidings of the Word of God to the English nation. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XXIII">I, 23</a>.]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 597,
          the aforesaid teachers arrived in Britain; being about the 150th
          year from the coming of the English into Britain. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XXV">I, 25</a>.]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 601,
          Pope Gregory sent the pall into Britain to Augustine, who was
          already made bishop; he sent also several ministers of the Word,
          among whom was Paulinus. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XXIX">I, 29</a>.]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 603,
          a battle was fought at Degsastan. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XXXIV">I, 34</a>.]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 604,
          the East Saxons received the faith of Christ, under King Sabert,
          Mellitus being bishop. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_III">II, 3</a>.]</p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page384">[pg 384]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg384"/>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 605,
          Gregory died. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_I">II,
          1</a>.]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 616,
          Ethelbert, king of Kent died. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_V">II, 5</a>.]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 625,
          Paulinus was ordained bishop of the Northumbrians by Archbishop
          Justus. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_IX">II,
          9</a>.]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 626,
          Eanfled, daughter of King Edwin, was baptized with twelve others,
          on the eve of Whitsunday. [<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ib.</span></span>]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 627,
          King Edwin was baptized, with his nation, at Easter. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XIV">II, 14</a>.]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 633,
          King Edwin being killed, Paulinus returned to Kent. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XX">II, 20</a>.]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 640,
          Eadbald, king of Kent, died. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_VIII">III, 8</a>.]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 642,
          King Oswald was slain. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_IX">III, 9</a>.]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 644,
          Paulinus, formerly bishop of York, but then of the city of
          Rochester, departed to the Lord. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XIV">III, 14</a>.]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 651,
          King Oswin was killed, and Bishop Aidan died. [<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ibid.</span></span>]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 653,
          the Middle Angles, under their prince, Penda, were admitted to the
          mysteries of the faith. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXI">III, 21</a>.]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 655,
          Penda was slain, and the Mercians became Christians. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXIV">III, 24</a>.]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 664,
          an eclipse came to pass; Earconbert, king of Kent, died; and Colman
          with the Scots returned to his people; a pestilence arose; Ceadda
          and Wilfrid were ordained bishops of the Northumbrians. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXVI">III, 26-28</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_I">IV, 1</a>.]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 668,
          Theodore was ordained bishop. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_I">IV, 1</a>.]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 670,
          Oswy, king of the Northumbrians, died. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_V">IV, 5</a>.]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 673,
          Egbert, king of Kent, died; and a synod was held at Hertford, in
          the presence of King Egfrid, Archbishop Theodore presiding: the
          synod was of great profit, and its decrees are contained in ten
          articles. [<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ibid.</span></span>]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year
          675,<a href="#note_1036" id="noteref_1036" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1036</span></span></a>
          Wulfhere, king of the Mercians, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page385">[pg 385]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg385"/> when he had reigned seventeen years, died and
          left the government to his brother Ethelred.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 676,
          Ethelred ravaged Kent. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XII">IV, 12</a>.]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 678,
          a comet appeared; Bishop Wilfrid was driven from his see by King
          Egfrid; and Bosa, Eata, and Eadhaed were consecrated bishops in his
          stead. [<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ibid.</span></span>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XIX">V, 19</a>.]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 679,
          Aelfwine was killed. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXI">IV, 21</a>.]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 680,
          a synod was held in the plain of Haethfelth, concerning the
          Catholic faith, Archbishop Theodore presiding; John, the Roman
          abbot, was also present. The same year also the Abbess Hilda died
          at Streanaeshalch. [IV, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XVII">17</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XVIII">18</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXIII">23</a>.]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 685,
          Egfrid, king of the Northumbrians, was slain. The same year
          Hlothere, king of Kent, died. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXVI">IV, 26</a>.]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 688,
          Caedwald, king of the West Saxons, went to Rome from Britain.
          [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_VII">V, 7</a>.]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 690,
          Archbishop Theodore died. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_VIII">V, 8</a>.]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 697,
          Queen Osthryth was murdered by her own nobles, to wit, the nobles
          of the Mercians.<a href="#note_1037" id="noteref_1037" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1037</span></span></a></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 698,
          Berctred, an ealdorman of the king of the Northumbrians, was slain
          by the Picts.<a href="#note_1038" id="noteref_1038" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1038</span></span></a></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 704,
          Ethelred, after he had reigned thirty-one years over the nation of
          the Mercians, became a monk, and gave up the kingdom to Coenred.
          [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XIX">V, 19</a>.]<a href="#note_1039" id="noteref_1039" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1039</span></span></a></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 705,
          Aldfrid, king of the Northumbrians, died. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XVIII">V, 18</a>.]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 709,
          Coenred, king of the Mercians, having reigned five years, went to
          Rome. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XIX">V,
          19</a>.]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 711,
          the commander Bertfrid fought with the Picts.<a href="#note_1040" id="noteref_1040" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1040</span></span></a></p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page386">[pg 386]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg386"/>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 716,
          Osred, king of the Northumbrians, was killed; and Ceolred, king of
          the Mercians, died; and the man of God, Egbert, brought the monks
          of Hii to observe the Catholic Easter and the ecclesiastical
          tonsure. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXII">V,
          22</a>.]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 725,
          Wictred, king of Kent, died. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIII">V, 23</a>.]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 729,
          comets appeared; the holy Egbert passed away; and Osric died.
          [<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ibid.</span></span>]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 731,
          Archbishop Bertwald died. [<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ibid.</span></span>]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The same year
          Tatwine was consecrated ninth archbishop of the church of
          Canterbury, in the fifteenth year of the reign of Ethelbald, king
          of the Mercians. [<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ibid.</span></span>]</p>
<div class="tei tei-tb">
<hr style="width: 50%"/>
</div>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Thus much of the
          Ecclesiastical History of Britain, and more especially of the
          English nation, as far as I could learn either from the writings of
          the ancients, or the tradition of our forefathers, or of my own
          knowledge, with the help of the Lord, I, Bede,<a href="#note_1041" id="noteref_1041" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1041</span></span></a> the
          servant of Christ, and priest of the monastery of the blessed
          Apostles, Peter and Paul, which is at Wearmouth and Jarrow,<a href="#note_1042" id="noteref_1042" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1042</span></span></a> have
          set forth. Having been born in the territory of that same
          monastery, I was given, by the care of kinsmen, at seven years of
          age, to be educated by the most reverend Abbot Benedict,<a href="#note_1043" id="noteref_1043" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1043</span></span></a> and
          afterwards by Ceolfrid,<a href="#note_1044" id="noteref_1044" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1044</span></span></a> and
          spending all the remaining time of my life a dweller in that
          monastery, I wholly applied myself to the study of Scripture; and
          amidst the observance of monastic rule, and the daily charge of
          singing in the church, I always took delight in learning, or
          teaching, or writing. In the nineteenth year of my age, I received
          deacon's orders; in the thirtieth, those of the priesthood, both of
          them by the ministry of the most reverend Bishop John,<a href="#note_1045" id="noteref_1045" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1045</span></span></a> and
          at <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page387">[pg 387]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg387"/> the bidding of the
          Abbot Ceolfrid. From the time when I received priest's orders, till
          the fifty-ninth year of my age, I have made it my business, for my
          own needs and those of my brethren, to compile out of the works of
          the venerable Fathers, the following brief notes on the Holy
          Scriptures, and also to make some additions after the manner of the
          meaning and interpretation given by them:<a href="#note_1046" id="noteref_1046" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1046</span></span></a></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">On the Beginning
          of Genesis, to the birth of Isaac and the casting out of Ishmael,
          four books.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Concerning the
          Tabernacle and its Vessels, and of the Vestments of the Priests,
          three books.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">On the first
          part of Samuel, to the Death of Saul, three books.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Concerning the
          Building of the Temple, of Allegorical Exposition, and other
          matters, two books.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Likewise on the
          Book of Kings, thirty Questions.<a href="#note_1047" id="noteref_1047" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1047</span></span></a></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">On the Proverbs
          of Solomon, three books.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">On the Song of
          Songs, seven books.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">On Isaiah,
          Daniel, the twelve Prophets, and Part of Jeremiah, Divisions of
          Chapters, collected from the Treatise of the blessed Jerome.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">On Ezra and
          Nehemiah, three books.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">On the song of
          Habakkuk, one book.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">On the Book of
          the blessed Father Tobias, one Book of Allegorical Explanation
          concerning Christ and the Church.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Also, Chapters
          of Readings on the Pentateuch of Moses, Joshua, and
          Judges;</p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page388">[pg
          388]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg388"/>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">On the Books of
          Kings and Chronicles;</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">On the Book of
          the blessed Father Job;</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">On the
          Proverbs,<a href="#note_1048" id="noteref_1048" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1048</span></span></a>
          Ecclesiastes, and the Song of Songs;</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">On the Prophets
          Isaiah, Ezra, and Nehemiah.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">On the Gospel of
          Mark, four books.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">On the Gospel of
          Luke, six books.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Of Homilies on
          the Gospel, two books.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">On the
          Apostle,<a href="#note_1049" id="noteref_1049" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1049</span></span></a>
          whatsoever I have found in the works of St. Augustine I have taken
          heed to transcribe in order.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">On the Acts of
          the Apostles, two books.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">On the seven
          Catholic Epistles, a book on each.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">On the
          Revelation of St. John, three books.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Likewise,
          Chapters of Lessons on all the New Testament, except the
          Gospel.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Likewise a book
          of Epistles to divers Persons, of which one is of the Six Ages of
          the world; one of the Halting-places of the Children of Israel; one
          on the words of Isaiah, <span class="tei tei-q">“And they shall be
          shut up in the prison, and after many days shall they be
          visited”</span>;<a href="#note_1050" id="noteref_1050" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1050</span></span></a> one
          of the Reason of Leap-Year, and one of the Equinox, according to
          Anatolius.<a href="#note_1051" id="noteref_1051" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1051</span></span></a></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Likewise
          concerning the Histories of Saints: I translated the Book of the
          Life and Passion of St. Felix, Confessor,<a href="#note_1052" id="noteref_1052" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1052</span></span></a> from
          the metrical work of Paulinus, into prose; the Book of the Life and
          Passion of St. Anastasius,<a href="#note_1053" id="noteref_1053" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1053</span></span></a>
          which was ill translated from the Greek, and worse amended by some
          ignorant person, I have corrected as to the sense as far as I
          could; I have written the Life of <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page389">[pg 389]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg389"/> the Holy Father Cuthbert,<a href="#note_1054" id="noteref_1054" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1054</span></span></a> who
          was both monk and bishop, first in heroic verse, and afterwards in
          prose.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The History of
          the Abbots of this monastery, in which I rejoice to serve the
          Divine Goodness, to wit, Benedict, Ceolfrid, and Huaetbert,<a href="#note_1055" id="noteref_1055" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1055</span></span></a> in
          two books.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The
          Ecclesiastical History of our Island and Nation, in five books.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The Martyrology
          of the Festivals of the Holy Martyrs, in which I have carefully
          endeavoured to set down all whom I could find, and not only on what
          day, but also by what sort of combat, and under what judge they
          overcame the world.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">A Book of Hymns
          in divers sorts of metre, or rhythm.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">A Book of
          Epigrams in heroic or elegiac verse.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Of the Nature of
          Things, and of the Times, one book of each; likewise, of the Times,
          one larger book.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">A book of
          Orthography arranged in Alphabetical Order.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Likewise a Book
          of the Art of Poetry, and to it I have added another little Book of
          Figures of Speech or Tropes; that is, of the Figures and Modes of
          Speech in which the Holy Scriptures are written.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">And I beseech
          Thee, good Jesus, that to whom Thou hast graciously granted sweetly
          to drink in the words of Thy knowledge, Thou wilt also vouchsafe in
          Thy loving-kindness that he may one day come to Thee, the Fountain
          of all wisdom, and appear for ever before Thy face.</p>
</div>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page390">[pg 390]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg390"/>
<hr class="page"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 5.00em; margin-top: 5.00em">
<a id="toc301"/> <a id="pdf302"/>
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Continuation"/>
<h1 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 3.46em; margin-top: 3.46em">
<span style="font-size: 173%">Continuation</span></h1>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Continuation of
        Bede.</span></span><a href="#note_1056" id="noteref_1056" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1056</span></span></a></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 731
        King Ceolwulf was taken prisoner, and tonsured, and sent back to his
        kingdom; Bishop Acca was driven from his see.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 732,
        Egbert<a href="#note_1057" id="noteref_1057" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1057</span></span></a> was
        made Bishop of York, in the room of Wilfrid.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">[Cynibert Bishop
        of Lindsey died.]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">[In the year of
        our Lord 733, Archbishop Tatwine, having received the pall by
        Apostolic authority, ordained Alwic<a href="#note_1058" id="noteref_1058" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1058</span></span></a> and
        Sigfrid,<a href="#note_1059" id="noteref_1059" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1059</span></span></a>
        bishops.]</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 733,
        there was an eclipse of the sun on the 14th day of August about the
        third hour, in such wise that the whole orb of the sun seemed to be
        covered with a black and gloomy shield.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 734,
        the moon, on the 31st of January, about the time of cock-crowing,
        was, for about a whole hour, coloured blood-red, after which a
        blackness followed, and she regained her wonted light.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year from
        the Incarnation of Christ, 734, bishop Tatwine died.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 735,
        Nothelm was ordained archbishop; and bishop Egbert, having received
        the pall from the Apostolic see, was the first to be established as
        <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page391">[pg 391]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg391"/> archbishop<a href="#note_1060" id="noteref_1060" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1060</span></span></a> after
        Paulinus, and he ordained Frithbert,<a href="#note_1061" id="noteref_1061" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1061</span></span></a> and
        Frithwald<a href="#note_1062" id="noteref_1062" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1062</span></span></a>
        bishops; and the priest Bede died.<a href="#note_1063" id="noteref_1063" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1063</span></span></a></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 737,
        an excessive drought rendered the land unfruitful; and Ceolwulf,
        voluntarily receiving the tonsure, left the kingdom to Eadbert.<a href="#note_1064" id="noteref_1064" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1064</span></span></a></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 739,
        Edilhart,<a href="#note_1065" id="noteref_1065" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1065</span></span></a> king
        of the West-Saxons, died, as did Archbishop Nothelm.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 740,
        Cuthbert<a href="#note_1066" id="noteref_1066" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1066</span></span></a> was
        consecrated in Nothelm's stead. Ethelbald, king of the Mercians,
        cruelly and wrongfully wasted part of Northumbria, their king,
        Eadbert, with his army, being employed against the Picts. Bishop
        Ethelwald died also, and Conwulf,<a href="#note_1067" id="noteref_1067" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1067</span></span></a> was
        consecrated in his stead. Arnwin<a href="#note_1068" id="noteref_1068" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1068</span></span></a> and
        Eadbert<a href="#note_1069" id="noteref_1069" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1069</span></span></a> were
        slain.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 741, a
        great drought came upon the country. Charles,<a href="#note_1070" id="noteref_1070" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1070</span></span></a> king
        of the Franks, died; and his sons, Caroloman and Pippin,<a href="#note_1071" id="noteref_1071" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1071</span></span></a>
        reigned in his stead.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 745,
        Bishop Wilfrid and Ingwald, Bishop of London, departed to the
        Lord.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 747,
        the man of God, Herefrid,<a href="#note_1072" id="noteref_1072" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1072</span></span></a>
        died.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 750,
        Cuthred, king of the West Saxons, rose up against king Ethelbald and
        Oengus; Theudor <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page392">[pg
        392]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg392"/> and
        Eanred died; Eadbert added the plain of Kyle and other places to his
        dominions.<a href="#note_1073" id="noteref_1073" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1073</span></span></a></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 753,
        in the fifth year of King Eadbert, on the 9th of January,<a href="#note_1074" id="noteref_1074" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1074</span></span></a> an
        eclipse of the sun came to pass; afterwards, in the same year and
        month, on the 24th day of January, the moon suffered an eclipse,
        being covered with a gloomy, black shield, in like manner as was the
        sun a little while before.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 754,
        Boniface,<a href="#note_1075" id="noteref_1075" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1075</span></span></a> called
        also Winfrid, Bishop of the Franks, received the crown of martyrdom,
        together with fifty-three others; and Redger was consecrated
        archbishop in his stead, by pope Stephen.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 757,
        Ethelbald, king of the Mercians, was treacherously and miserably
        murdered, in the night, by his own guards; Beornred<a href="#note_1076" id="noteref_1076" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1076</span></span></a> began
        his reign; Cyniwulf,<a href="#note_1077" id="noteref_1077" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1077</span></span></a> king
        of the West Saxons, died; and the same year, Offa, having put
        Beornred to flight, sought to gain the kingdom of the Mercians by
        bloodshed.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 758,
        Eadbert, king of the Northumbrians, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page393">[pg 393]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg393"/> receiving St. Peter's tonsure for the love of
        God, and to the end that he might take the heavenly country by
        force,<a href="#note_1078" id="noteref_1078" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1078</span></span></a> left
        the kingdom to his son Oswulf.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 755,
        Oswulf was wickedly murdered by his own thegns; and Ethelwald, being
        chosen the same year by his people, entered upon the kingdom; in
        whose second year there was great tribulation by reason of
        pestilence, which continued almost two years, divers grievous
        sicknesses raging, but more especially the disease of dysentery.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 761,
        Oengus,<a href="#note_1079" id="noteref_1079" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1079</span></span></a> king
        of the Picts, died; who, from the beginning to the end of his reign,
        continued to be a blood-stained and tyrannical butcher; Oswin<a href="#note_1080" id="noteref_1080" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1080</span></span></a> was
        also slain.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 765,
        King Aluchred came to the throne.<a href="#note_1081" id="noteref_1081" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1081</span></span></a></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the year 766
        <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>, Archbishop Egbert, of
        the royal race, and endued with divine knowledge, as also Frithbert,
        both of them truly faithful bishops, departed to the Lord.</p>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page395">[pg 395]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg395"/>
<hr class="page"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 5.00em; margin-top: 5.00em">
<a id="toc303"/> <a id="pdf304"/>
<h1 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 3.46em; margin-top: 3.46em">
<span style="font-size: 173%">Index</span></h1>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Aaron, British Martyr, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg018" style="text-align: left">18</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Aaron, High Priest, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg361" style="text-align: left">361</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Abbots"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Abbots,
            Anonymous History of the,”</span> editorial references to,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxv" style="text-align: left">xxxv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg257" style="text-align: left">257</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg389" style="text-align: left">389</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">and see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Bede" style="text-align: left">Bede</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Abercorn"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Abercorn or Aebbercurnig, Monastery of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxix" style="text-align: left">xxix</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg286" style="text-align: left">286</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Abraham's Oak, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg342" style="text-align: left">342</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Abraham's Tomb, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg341" style="text-align: left">341</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Acca"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Acca, friend of Bede, afterwards Bishop of Hexham, in succession
            to Wilfrid, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxx" style="text-align: left">xxx</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg161" style="text-align: left">161</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg248" style="text-align: left">248</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg357" style="text-align: left">357</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg358" style="text-align: left">358</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg379" style="text-align: left">379</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg381" style="text-align: left">381</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his attachment to Wilfrid, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg161" style="text-align: left">161</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg355" style="text-align: left">355</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg358" style="text-align: left">358</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            driven from his see, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg161" style="text-align: left">161</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg390" style="text-align: left">390</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his good works, musical gifts and learning, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg358" style="text-align: left">358</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            educated by Bosa, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg358" style="text-align: left">358</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Acha, sister of Edwin, wife of Ethelfrid, and mother of Oswald,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg147" style="text-align: left">147</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg383" style="text-align: left">383</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Acts of the Apostles, quoted, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg011" style="text-align: left">11</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg197" style="text-align: left">197</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg304" style="text-align: left">304</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg335" style="text-align: left">335</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg371" style="text-align: left">371</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Adalbert, Life
            of,”</span> editorial reference to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg143" style="text-align: left">143</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Adam, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg130" style="text-align: left">130</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg341" style="text-align: left">341</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his tomb, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg341" style="text-align: left">341</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Adamnan-Iona"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Adamnan, Abbot of Iona, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg140" style="text-align: left">140</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg285" style="text-align: left">285</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his work on the Holy Places (<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“De Locis Sanctis”</span>), <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxii" style="text-align: left">xxii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxx" style="text-align: left">xxx</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg337" style="text-align: left">337</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg338" style="text-align: left">338</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Life of St.
            Columba,”</span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg336" style="text-align: left">336</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his missions to King Aldfrid, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg336" style="text-align: left">336</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg372" style="text-align: left">372</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            converts the Irish to the Catholic Easter and ecclesiastical
            tonsure, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg336" style="text-align: left">336</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg337" style="text-align: left">337</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg372" style="text-align: left">372</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg373" style="text-align: left">373</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg337" style="text-align: left">337</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            receives Arculf, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg338" style="text-align: left">338</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            return to Ireland, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg373" style="text-align: left">373</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Adamnan, Monk of Coldingham, foretells the burning of Coldingham
            Monastery, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxix" style="text-align: left">xxix</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg283" style="text-align: left">283</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg284" style="text-align: left">284</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his vision, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg281" style="text-align: left">281</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg283" style="text-align: left">283</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg284" style="text-align: left">284</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his penitence, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg282" style="text-align: left">282</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg283" style="text-align: left">283</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his austerity, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg281" style="text-align: left">281</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg282" style="text-align: left">282</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg283" style="text-align: left">283</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Ad-Barvae"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ad Barvae, or At the Wood, Monastery of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg219" style="text-align: left">219</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg231" style="text-align: left">231</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Adda, Northumbrian priest, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvii" style="text-align: left">xxvii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg180" style="text-align: left">180</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg181" style="text-align: left">181</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Addi, a thegn, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg308" style="text-align: left">308</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Adeodatus, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg179" style="text-align: left">179</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Adgefrin, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Yeavering" style="text-align: left">Yeavering</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Adtuifyrdi, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Twyford" style="text-align: left">Twyford</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Adulwald, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Eadbald" style="text-align: left">Eadbald</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Aebba"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Aebba, Abbess of Coldingham, half-sister of Oswy, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg260" style="text-align: left">260</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg283" style="text-align: left">283</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg284" style="text-align: left">284</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            account of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg260" style="text-align: left">260</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            her name, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg260" style="text-align: left">260</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            founds the monasteries of Ebchester and Coldingham, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg260" style="text-align: left">260</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            her friendship for Cuthbert, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg260" style="text-align: left">260</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            intercedes for Wilfrid, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg260" style="text-align: left">260</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg352" style="text-align: left">352</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            her death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg284" style="text-align: left">284</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Aebbercurnig, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Abercorn" style="text-align: left">Abercorn</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Aecci"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Aecci, Bishop of Dunwich, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg231" style="text-align: left">231</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Aedan"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Aedan, King of Scots, defeated by Ethelfrid, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg073" style="text-align: left">73</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg074" style="text-align: left">74</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Aedgils, fellow priest of Bede, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg284" style="text-align: left">284</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Aelfric (<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Grammaticus”</span>) editorial reference to,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg288" style="text-align: left">288</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Aelfric, father of Osric, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg134" style="text-align: left">134</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg164" style="text-align: left">164</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Aelfwine"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Aelfwine, brother of Egfrid, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg267" style="text-align: left">267</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg385" style="text-align: left">385</a>.
          </div>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page396">[pg 396]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg396"/>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Aelli-Deira"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Aelli, King of Deira, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg073" style="text-align: left">73</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg083" style="text-align: left">83</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Gregory's pun on his name, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg083" style="text-align: left">83</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Aelli"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Aelli, King of Sussex, first Bretwalda, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg094" style="text-align: left">94</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg245" style="text-align: left">245</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Aenhere"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Aenhere, King of the Hwiccas, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg246" style="text-align: left">246</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Aescwine"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Aescwine, Sub-king of Wessex, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg241" style="text-align: left">241</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Aesica, a little boy dedicated to religion, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxiii" style="text-align: left">xxxiii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg234" style="text-align: left">234</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Aetherius"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Aetherius, Archbishop of Lyons, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg044" style="text-align: left">44</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg049" style="text-align: left">49</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg063" style="text-align: left">63</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Aetius, the Consul, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg026" style="text-align: left">26</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg027" style="text-align: left">27</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            put to death by Valentinian, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg027" style="text-align: left">27</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg041" style="text-align: left">41</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Aetla"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Aetla, Bishop of Dorchester, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg272" style="text-align: left">272</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg273" style="text-align: left">273</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Aetswinapathe, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ouestraefelda" style="text-align: left">Ouestraefelda</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Africa, Churches of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg196" style="text-align: left">196</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Agabus, the prophet, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg011" style="text-align: left">11</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Agatha, St., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg265" style="text-align: left">265</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Agatho, Pope, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg254" style="text-align: left">254</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            sends John the precentor to report on the English Church,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg257" style="text-align: left">257</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg258" style="text-align: left">258</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg259" style="text-align: left">259</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            holds a Synod against the Monothelites, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg352" style="text-align: left">352</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            tries Wilfrid's cause, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg352" style="text-align: left">352</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg353" style="text-align: left">353</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg354" style="text-align: left">354</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Agatho, a priest, companion of Agilbert, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg195" style="text-align: left">195</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Agilbert"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Agilbert, missionary to the West Saxons, Bishop of Dorchester,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg147" style="text-align: left">147</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg148" style="text-align: left">148</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg149" style="text-align: left">149</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg194" style="text-align: left">194</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg241" style="text-align: left">241</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            offended by Coinwalch, returns to Gaul, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg150" style="text-align: left">150</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            made Bishop of Paris, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg150" style="text-align: left">150</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg350" style="text-align: left">350</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            refuses to return to England, and sends Leutherius in his place,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg150" style="text-align: left">150</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg151" style="text-align: left">151</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            at the Whitby Synod, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg195" style="text-align: left">195</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg196" style="text-align: left">196</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg201" style="text-align: left">201</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his ignorance of English, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg196" style="text-align: left">196</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            entertains Theodore, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg215" style="text-align: left">215</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            consecrates Wilfrid, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg206" style="text-align: left">206</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg350" style="text-align: left">350</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Agnes, St., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg054" style="text-align: left">54</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg265" style="text-align: left">265</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Agricola, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg011" style="text-align: left">11</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Agricola, son of Severianus, a Pelagian, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg032" style="text-align: left">32</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Aidan"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Aidan, Monk of Iona, Abbot and Bishop of Lindisfarne, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxv" style="text-align: left">xxv</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg004" style="text-align: left">4</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg139" style="text-align: left">139</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg140" style="text-align: left">140</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg201" style="text-align: left">201</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg347" style="text-align: left">347</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Bede's admiration for, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxix" style="text-align: left">xxxix</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his mission to Northumbria, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg138" style="text-align: left">138</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg144" style="text-align: left">144</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg146" style="text-align: left">146</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg376" style="text-align: left">376</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his life, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg144" style="text-align: left">144</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg146" style="text-align: left">146</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            ordination, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg144" style="text-align: left">144</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his character, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg138" style="text-align: left">138</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg144" style="text-align: left">144</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg145" style="text-align: left">145</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg170" style="text-align: left">170</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg171" style="text-align: left">171</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his doctrine, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg144" style="text-align: left">144</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg145" style="text-align: left">145</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his good example, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg144" style="text-align: left">144</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg145" style="text-align: left">145</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his rebuke to Corman, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg145" style="text-align: left">145</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            gives his horse to a beggar, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg165" style="text-align: left">165</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his friendship for Oswin, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg165" style="text-align: left">165</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg166" style="text-align: left">166</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg166" style="text-align: left">166</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg169" style="text-align: left">169</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg192" style="text-align: left">192</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg288" style="text-align: left">288</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg384" style="text-align: left">384</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his prevision of Oswin's death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg166" style="text-align: left">166</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            foretells and calms a storm, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg166" style="text-align: left">166</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg167" style="text-align: left">167</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his miracles, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg166" style="text-align: left">166</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg167" style="text-align: left">167</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg168" style="text-align: left">168</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg169" style="text-align: left">169</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg170" style="text-align: left">170</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            at Farne, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg168" style="text-align: left">168</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            saves Bamborough from fire, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg168" style="text-align: left">168</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his body translated to Lindisfarne, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg169" style="text-align: left">169</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg202" style="text-align: left">202</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his observance of Easter, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg170" style="text-align: left">170</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg171" style="text-align: left">171</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg193" style="text-align: left">193</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his disciples, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg202" style="text-align: left">202</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg208" style="text-align: left">208</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his rule, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg290" style="text-align: left">290</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            persuades Hilda to return to Northumbria, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg271" style="text-align: left">271</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            consecrates Heiu as a nun, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg271" style="text-align: left">271</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Aire, the River, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg189" style="text-align: left">189</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Akeburg"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Akeburgh (perhaps Jacobsburgh), <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg132" style="text-align: left">132</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Alani, the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg022" style="text-align: left">22</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg041" style="text-align: left">41</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Alaric, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg022" style="text-align: left">22</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Alban, St., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiii" style="text-align: left">xxiii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg039" style="text-align: left">39</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his conversion, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg014" style="text-align: left">14</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg015" style="text-align: left">15</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg016" style="text-align: left">16</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Lives of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg015" style="text-align: left">15</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            miracles, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg017" style="text-align: left">17</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his tomb, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg036" style="text-align: left">36</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his blood, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg036" style="text-align: left">36</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Albinus"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Albinus, Abbot of St. Augustine's Monastery, Canterbury, in
            succession to Hadrian, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxx" style="text-align: left">xxx</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg002" style="text-align: left">2</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg003" style="text-align: left">3</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg357" style="text-align: left">357</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his scholarship, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg002" style="text-align: left">2</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg357" style="text-align: left">357</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            furnishes Bede with materials for the <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Ecclesiastical History,”</span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg002" style="text-align: left">2</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg003" style="text-align: left">3</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Albion, early name of Britain, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg005" style="text-align: left">5</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Alchfled, daughter of Oswy, wife of Peada, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg180" style="text-align: left">180</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg191" style="text-align: left">191</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Alchfrid, King of Deira, son of Oswy, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvii" style="text-align: left">xxvii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg195" style="text-align: left">195</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg206" style="text-align: left">206</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg377" style="text-align: left">377</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            rebels against Oswy, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg163" style="text-align: left">163</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg207" style="text-align: left">207</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            account of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg163" style="text-align: left">163</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            converts Peada, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg180" style="text-align: left">180</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg180" style="text-align: left">180</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            at the battle of the Winwaed, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg188" style="text-align: left">188</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            friendship for Wilfrid, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg194" style="text-align: left">194</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg350" style="text-align: left">350</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his observance of Easter, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg194" style="text-align: left">194</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg195" style="text-align: left">195</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            at Whitby, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg195" style="text-align: left">195</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            friendship for Coinwalch of Wessex, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg350" style="text-align: left">350</a>.
          </div>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page397">[pg 397]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg397"/>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Alcluith, or Dumbarton, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Dumbarton" style="text-align: left">Dumbarton</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Alcuin"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Alcuin, his letter to the monks of Wearmouth, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxv" style="text-align: left">xxxv</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his influence on learning, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxxvi</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his anecdote of Bede, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxvii" style="text-align: left">xxxvii</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“De Sanct.
            Ebor.”</span> quoted, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg243" style="text-align: left">243</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg273" style="text-align: left">273</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Life of
            Wilbrord”</span> quoted, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg143" style="text-align: left">143</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            ref. to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg319" style="text-align: left">319</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg320" style="text-align: left">320</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg323" style="text-align: left">323</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg325" style="text-align: left">325</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Aldbert"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Aldbert, Bishop of Dunwich, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg379" style="text-align: left">379</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg380" style="text-align: left">380</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Aldfrid"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Aldfrid, King of Northumbria after Egfrid, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxix" style="text-align: left">xxix</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg287" style="text-align: left">287</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg302" style="text-align: left">302</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg312" style="text-align: left">312</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg353" style="text-align: left">353</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg372" style="text-align: left">372</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg377" style="text-align: left">377</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxx" style="text-align: left">xxx</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg342" style="text-align: left">342</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg356" style="text-align: left">356</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg385" style="text-align: left">385</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg391" style="text-align: left">391</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his relations with Wilfrid, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg247" style="text-align: left">247</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg353" style="text-align: left">353</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg354" style="text-align: left">354</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg356" style="text-align: left">356</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            account of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg287" style="text-align: left">287</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            retrieves the fortunes of Northumbria, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg287" style="text-align: left">287</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            visits Drythelm, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg331" style="text-align: left">331</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            friendship for Adamnan, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg336" style="text-align: left">336</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg338" style="text-align: left">338</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his exile in Iona, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg336" style="text-align: left">336</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Aldgils"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Aldgils, King of Frisland, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg351" style="text-align: left">351</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Aldhelm"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Aldhelm, Bishop of Sherborne, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxx" style="text-align: left">xxx</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg148" style="text-align: left">148</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg210" style="text-align: left">210</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg265" style="text-align: left">265</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg343" style="text-align: left">343</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg345" style="text-align: left">345</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his women scholars, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg237" style="text-align: left">237</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            letter to Geraint, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg336" style="text-align: left">336</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg344" style="text-align: left">344</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            account of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg343" style="text-align: left">343</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            letter to Wilfrid's clergy, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg343" style="text-align: left">343</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            made Abbot of Malmesbury, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg343" style="text-align: left">343</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg344" style="text-align: left">344</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg343" style="text-align: left">343</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg344" style="text-align: left">344</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            buried at St. Michael's, Malmesbury, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg343" style="text-align: left">343</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his literary works, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg344" style="text-align: left">344</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Aldwin-Partney"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Aldwin, Abbot of Partney or Peartaneu, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg158" style="text-align: left">158</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Aldwin-Worr"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Aldwin, or Worr, Bishop of Lichfield, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg379" style="text-align: left">379</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg380" style="text-align: left">380</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Aldwulf-Rochester"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Aldwulf, Bishop of Rochester, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg378" style="text-align: left">378</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg379" style="text-align: left">379</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg380" style="text-align: left">380</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Aldwulf-King"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Aldwulf, King of East Anglia, son of Ethelhere, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg121" style="text-align: left">121</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg254" style="text-align: left">254</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg271" style="text-align: left">271</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his support of Ethelthryth, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg260" style="text-align: left">260</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Alemanni, the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg092" style="text-align: left">92</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Alexandria, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg338" style="text-align: left">338</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg364" style="text-align: left">364</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Alexandria, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Cyril" style="text-align: left">Cyril</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Theophilus" style="text-align: left">Theophilus</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Alexandrians, the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg366" style="text-align: left">366</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Alfred, his translation of the <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Ecclesiastical History,”</span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxx" style="text-align: left">xx</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg321" style="text-align: left">321</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Alfrid"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Alfrid,”</span>
            King of Northumbria, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg377" style="text-align: left">377</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Allectus, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg014" style="text-align: left">14</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Allelujah, or Hallelujah, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg083" style="text-align: left">83</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            All Martyrs, the Festival of, later the festival of All Saints,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg093" style="text-align: left">93</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            All Saints, the Festival of, introduced by Pope Boniface,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg093" style="text-align: left">93</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Alne, the River, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg292" style="text-align: left">292</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Alric"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Alric, son of Wictred of Kent, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg377" style="text-align: left">377</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Aluchred"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Aluchred, King of Northumbria, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg393" style="text-align: left">393</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Alweo, brother of Penda, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg380" style="text-align: left">380</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Alwic"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Alwic, Bishop of Lindsey, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg390" style="text-align: left">390</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Amasea, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Asterius" style="text-align: left">Asterius</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Amber, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg006" style="text-align: left">6</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ambleteuse, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Amfleat" style="text-align: left">Amfleat</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ambrose, St., quoted, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxlii" style="text-align: left">xlii</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ambrosius Aurelianus, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg031" style="text-align: left">31</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg032" style="text-align: left">32</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Amfleat"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Amfleat, or Ambleteuse, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg072" style="text-align: left">72</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg073" style="text-align: left">73</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Amphibalus, St., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg015" style="text-align: left">15</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Amulets, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg289" style="text-align: left">289</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Anastasis (Resurrection of our Lord), Church at Jerusalem,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg339" style="text-align: left">339</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Anastasius"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Anastasius, St., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg388" style="text-align: left">388</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Anatolius"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Anatolius, Bishop of Laodicea, authority on the Easter question,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg139" style="text-align: left">139</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg198" style="text-align: left">198</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg199" style="text-align: left">199</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg368" style="text-align: left">368</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg388" style="text-align: left">388</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ancyra, a cloak of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg109" style="text-align: left">109</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Andeley-sur-Seine"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Andeley-sur-Seine, Monastery of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg152" style="text-align: left">152</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Andhun, ealdorman, rules the South Saxons, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg251" style="text-align: left">251</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Andilegum, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Andeley-sur-Seine" style="text-align: left">Andeley-sur-Seine</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Andragius, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Androgius" style="text-align: left">Androgius</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Andredsweald, the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg245" style="text-align: left">245</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Andrew, a monk, refuses the English Archbishopric, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg214" style="text-align: left">214</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Andrew, St., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg042" style="text-align: left">42</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg089" style="text-align: left">89</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg163" style="text-align: left">163</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Androgius"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Androgius, Andragius, Androgorius or Mandubracius, Chief of the
            Trinovantes, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg010" style="text-align: left">10</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Angels, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxviii" style="text-align: left">xxxviii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg174" style="text-align: left">174</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg175" style="text-align: left">175</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg176" style="text-align: left">176</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg221" style="text-align: left">221</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg222" style="text-align: left">222</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg333" style="text-align: left">333</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg334" style="text-align: left">334</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Angles, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg029" style="text-align: left">29</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg030" style="text-align: left">30</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg031" style="text-align: left">31</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg082" style="text-align: left">82</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Gregory's pun upon, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg082" style="text-align: left">82</a>.
          </div>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page398">[pg 398]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg398"/>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Anglesea, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg094" style="text-align: left">94</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg102" style="text-align: left">102</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Anglia"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Anglia, the name of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg030" style="text-align: left">30</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Angrivarii, the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg317" style="text-align: left">317</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Angulus, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Anglia" style="text-align: left">Anglia</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Anna"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Anna, King of East Anglia, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg149" style="text-align: left">149</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg152" style="text-align: left">152</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg172" style="text-align: left">172</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg185" style="text-align: left">185</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg189" style="text-align: left">189</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg232" style="text-align: left">232</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg260" style="text-align: left">260</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg271" style="text-align: left">271</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his piety, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg149" style="text-align: left">149</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg172" style="text-align: left">172</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg259" style="text-align: left">259</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his good children, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg149" style="text-align: left">149</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg173" style="text-align: left">173</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            slain by Penda, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg173" style="text-align: left">173</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            enriches the monastery of Cnobheresburg, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg174" style="text-align: left">174</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Annales
            Cambriae,”</span> editorial references to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg032" style="text-align: left">32</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg337" style="text-align: left">337</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Annales
            Francorum,”</span> editorial reference to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg323" style="text-align: left">323</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Annegray, Monastery of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg092" style="text-align: left">92</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Annemundus"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Annemundus (Dalfinus), Archbishop of Lyons, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg194" style="text-align: left">194</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his kindness to Wilfrid, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg248" style="text-align: left">248</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg348" style="text-align: left">348</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his execution, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg349" style="text-align: left">349</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Anselm"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Anselm, Archbishop of Canterbury, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg072" style="text-align: left">72</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Antioch, Patriarch of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Anastasius" style="text-align: left">Anastasius</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Antoninus Pius, his rampart, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg024" style="text-align: left">24</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Antonius-Bassianus"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Antonius, Bassianus, Emperor, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg013" style="text-align: left">13</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Antwerp, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxi" style="text-align: left">xxi</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Appleby"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Appleby, Thomas, Bishop of Carlisle, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg294" style="text-align: left">294</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Apollinarianism, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg255" style="text-align: left">255</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Apostles, the, their manner of tonsure, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg370" style="text-align: left">370</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Aquila, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg197" style="text-align: left">197</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Aquileia, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg020" style="text-align: left">20</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Aquitaine, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg021" style="text-align: left">21</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg033" style="text-align: left">33</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg369" style="text-align: left">369</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Arcadius, Emperor of the East, son of Theodosius, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg020" style="text-align: left">20</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Arculf"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Arculf, Bishop of Gaul, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg337" style="text-align: left">337-340</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Argyll, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg008" style="text-align: left">8</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Arianism, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiii" style="text-align: left">xxiii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg019" style="text-align: left">19</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg020" style="text-align: left">20</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg148" style="text-align: left">148</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg255" style="text-align: left">255</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Arles, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg022" style="text-align: left">22</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg049" style="text-align: left">49</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg215" style="text-align: left">215</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Bishop of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg054" style="text-align: left">54</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Arles, Archbishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-John-Arles" style="text-align: left">John</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Vergilius" style="text-align: left">Vergilius</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Armagh, Abbot of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Tomene" style="text-align: left">Tomene</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Armagh, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Tomene" style="text-align: left">Tomene</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Armenia, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg006" style="text-align: left">6</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Armorica, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg007" style="text-align: left">7</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Armoricans, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg041" style="text-align: left">41</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Arnwin, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg391" style="text-align: left">391</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Arwald"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Arwald, King of the Isle of Wight, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg252" style="text-align: left">252</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his brothers, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg252" style="text-align: left">252</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg253" style="text-align: left">253</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Asclepiodotus, restores Britain to the Romans, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg014" style="text-align: left">14</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ascension, the Basilica of the, at Jerusalem, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg340" style="text-align: left">340</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg341" style="text-align: left">341</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Asia, Churches of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg196" style="text-align: left">196</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Asterius-Genoa"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Asterius, Bishop of Genoa (Archbishop of Milan), <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg148" style="text-align: left">148</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Asterius"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Asterius, Bishop of Amasea, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg265" style="text-align: left">265</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Astronomy, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg217" style="text-align: left">217</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Athelstan, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg303" style="text-align: left">303</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Atlantic, the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg005" style="text-align: left">5</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            At the Stone, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Stoneham" style="text-align: left">Stoneham</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            At the Wood, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ad-Barvae" style="text-align: left">Ad Barvae</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Attila, King of the Huns, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg027" style="text-align: left">27</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg317" style="text-align: left">317</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Audrey, popular form of Ethelthryth, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg263" style="text-align: left">263</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Augustine"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Augustine, St., sent by Pope Gregory to convert the English,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxi" style="text-align: left">xxi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxii" style="text-align: left">xxii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiii" style="text-align: left">xxiii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxiv</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg042" style="text-align: left">42</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg043" style="text-align: left">43</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg047" style="text-align: left">47</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg048" style="text-align: left">48</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg081" style="text-align: left">81</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg086" style="text-align: left">86</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg094" style="text-align: left">94</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg098" style="text-align: left">98</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg126" style="text-align: left">126</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg210" style="text-align: left">210</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            ordained abbot, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg043" style="text-align: left">43</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            recommended to Aetherius, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg044" style="text-align: left">44</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            lands in Thanet, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg045" style="text-align: left">45</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg093" style="text-align: left">93</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg094" style="text-align: left">94</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg142" style="text-align: left">142</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg383" style="text-align: left">383</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            received by Ethelbert and Bertha, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg045" style="text-align: left">45</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg046" style="text-align: left">46</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg047" style="text-align: left">47</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            settles at Canterbury, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg047" style="text-align: left">47</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg048" style="text-align: left">48</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg072" style="text-align: left">72</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his report to Gregory, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg049" style="text-align: left">49</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            ordained Archbishop of the English at Arles, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg049" style="text-align: left">49</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg383" style="text-align: left">383</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his see, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg049" style="text-align: left">49</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            recommended by Gregory to Vergilius, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg063" style="text-align: left">63</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg064" style="text-align: left">64</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            receives the pall, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg064" style="text-align: left">64</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg065" style="text-align: left">65</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg066" style="text-align: left">66</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg383" style="text-align: left">383</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his miracles, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg068" style="text-align: left">68</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg069" style="text-align: left">69</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg081" style="text-align: left">81</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg083" style="text-align: left">83</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg085" style="text-align: left">85</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            recommended to Ethelbert by Gregory, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg070" style="text-align: left">70</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg071" style="text-align: left">71</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            restores the Church of St. Saviour, Canterbury, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg072" style="text-align: left">72</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            builds the Monastery of SS. Peter and Paul, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg072" style="text-align: left">72</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            calls a Synod, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg083" style="text-align: left">83</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his dispute with the British bishops, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg085" style="text-align: left">85</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg087" style="text-align: left">87</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his prophecy of disaster, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg087" style="text-align: left">87</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg089" style="text-align: left">89</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            ordains Mellitus and Justus, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg089" style="text-align: left">89</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg088" style="text-align: left">88</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg089" style="text-align: left">89</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg090" style="text-align: left">90</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            buried in the Church of SS. Peter and Paul, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg072" style="text-align: left">72</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg090" style="text-align: left">90</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his tomb and epitaph, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg090" style="text-align: left">90</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his body translated, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg090" style="text-align: left">90</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his monastic rule, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg290" style="text-align: left">290</a>.
          </div>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page399">[pg 399]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg399"/>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Augustine, St., Bishop of Hippo, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg021" style="text-align: left">21</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg388" style="text-align: left">388</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            The Sentences of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg341" style="text-align: left">341</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Augustine's Ác, or Augustine's Oak, Synod at, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg084" style="text-align: left">84-86</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Augustus, Emperor, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg011" style="text-align: left">11</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg012" style="text-align: left">12</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg013" style="text-align: left">13</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg020" style="text-align: left">20</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg022" style="text-align: left">22</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg026" style="text-align: left">26</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg029" style="text-align: left">29</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg042" style="text-align: left">42</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Aurelius"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Aurelius Commodus, Emperor, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg012" style="text-align: left">12</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Aurelius Victor, quoted, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg135" style="text-align: left">135</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Aust, probably Augustine's Ác, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg084" style="text-align: left">84</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Austerfield, Northumbria, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg353" style="text-align: left">353</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Austrasia, King of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Dagobert-II" style="text-align: left">Dagobert</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Avon, the River, in Linlithgow, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg189" style="text-align: left">189</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Aylesford, Kent, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg030" style="text-align: left">30</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ayrshire, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg325" style="text-align: left">325</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg392" style="text-align: left">392</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Babbanburch, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Bamborough" style="text-align: left">Bamborough</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Badbury, Dorsetshire, supposed to be Badon Hill, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg032" style="text-align: left">32</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Badon Hill, Battle of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg032" style="text-align: left">32</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg042" style="text-align: left">42</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Baducing, patronymic of Benedict Biscop, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg257" style="text-align: left">257</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Badudegn, a monk of Lindisfarne, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg298" style="text-align: left">298</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg299" style="text-align: left">299</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Badwin"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Badwin, Bishop of Elmham, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg231" style="text-align: left">231</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Baithanus, Irish bishop, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg128" style="text-align: left">128</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Balder, the God, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg323" style="text-align: left">323</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Baldhild"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Baldhild, or Bathild, Queen Regent of Neustria, wife of Clovis
            II, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg152" style="text-align: left">152</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg349" style="text-align: left">349</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ballads, English, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg277" style="text-align: left">277</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Baltic, The, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg317" style="text-align: left">317</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Bamborough"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bamborough, Babbanburch, Bebbanburh, or Bebburgh, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg147" style="text-align: left">147</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg161" style="text-align: left">161</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg168" style="text-align: left">168</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg383" style="text-align: left">383</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg385" style="text-align: left">385</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bangor, alleged birthplace of Pelagius, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg021" style="text-align: left">21</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bangor-is-Coed, or Bancornaburg, monastery of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg086" style="text-align: left">86</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg086" style="text-align: left">86</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg088" style="text-align: left">88</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bangor, Abbot of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Dinoot" style="text-align: left">Dinoot</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Baptism, of women, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg055" style="text-align: left">55</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg056" style="text-align: left">56</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            of children, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg055" style="text-align: left">55</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg056" style="text-align: left">56</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            its practice in the British Church, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg087" style="text-align: left">87</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            in the Roman Church, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg087" style="text-align: left">87</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            proper days for, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg104" style="text-align: left">104</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            ritual of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg119" style="text-align: left">119</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Bardney"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bardney, Monastery of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg123" style="text-align: left">123</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg157" style="text-align: left">157</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg158" style="text-align: left">158</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg224" style="text-align: left">224</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg241" style="text-align: left">241</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            endowed by Ethelred and Osthryth, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg157" style="text-align: left">157</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            burial place of Oswald, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg157" style="text-align: left">157</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg158" style="text-align: left">158</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bardney, Abbot of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ethelred" style="text-align: left">Ethelred</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Hygbald" style="text-align: left">Hygbald</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Barking"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Barking, or In Berecingum, Monastery of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxviii" style="text-align: left">xxviii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxiii" style="text-align: left">xxxiii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg232" style="text-align: left">232</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg233" style="text-align: left">233</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg234" style="text-align: left">234</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg235" style="text-align: left">235</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg237" style="text-align: left">237</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg238" style="text-align: left">238</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Barking, Abbess of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ethelburg" style="text-align: left">Ethelburg</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Barrow, Lincolnshire, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg219" style="text-align: left">219</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Barton-on-Humber, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg219" style="text-align: left">219</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Basil, St., his Hexameron, quoted, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg006" style="text-align: left">6</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bassianus, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Antonius-Bassianus" style="text-align: left">Antonius</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bassus, Edwin's thegn, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg132" style="text-align: left">132</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bathild, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Baldhild" style="text-align: left">Baldhild</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Baths of Britain, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg006" style="text-align: left">6</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bay of the Lighthouse, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Whitby-Bay" style="text-align: left">Whitby</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Beardaneu, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Bardney" style="text-align: left">Bardney</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bebba, Queen, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg147" style="text-align: left">147</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg168" style="text-align: left">168</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bebbanburh, or Bebburgh, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Bamborough" style="text-align: left">Bamborough</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Bede"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bede, or Beda, the author, called <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Venerable,”</span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxi" style="text-align: left">xxi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxxiv</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            account of his life, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxiii" style="text-align: left">xxxiii-xliii</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his family, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxiii" style="text-align: left">xxxiii</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            born near Wearmouth, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxiii" style="text-align: left">xxxiii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxxiv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg386" style="text-align: left">386</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his instructors, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxiii" style="text-align: left">xxxiii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxxiv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg222" style="text-align: left">222</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg257" style="text-align: left">257</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg386" style="text-align: left">386</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his ordination, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxiii" style="text-align: left">xxxiii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg273" style="text-align: left">273</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg386" style="text-align: left">386</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his life spent in the Monastery of Wearmouth and Jarrow, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxiii" style="text-align: left">xxxiii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxxiv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg137" style="text-align: left">137</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg386" style="text-align: left">386</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            dates of his birth and death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxxiv</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his autobiography, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxxiv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg386" style="text-align: left">386-389</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his diligence, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxxiv</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his eyes dim in age, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxxiv</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxix" style="text-align: left">xix</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxxiv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxix" style="text-align: left">xxxix-xliii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg391" style="text-align: left">391</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his epitaph, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxxiv</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his learning, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxxiv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxv" style="text-align: left">xxxv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxxvi</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his style, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxxvi</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            visits Lindisfarne, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxxvi</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            visits York, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxxvi</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Egbert his pupil, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxxvi</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Epistola ad
            Ecgbertum,”</span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg273" style="text-align: left">273</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg342" style="text-align: left">342</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his influence, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxxvi</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his last illness, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxix" style="text-align: left">xxxix</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxl" style="text-align: left">xl</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxlii" style="text-align: left">xlii</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxliii" style="text-align: left">xliii</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Life of
            Cuthbert”</span> in prose and verse, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg004" style="text-align: left">4</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg260" style="text-align: left">260</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg285" style="text-align: left">285</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg287" style="text-align: left">287</a> n.,
            <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page400">[pg 400]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" style="text-align: left" id="Pg400"/> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg288" style="text-align: left">288</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg291" style="text-align: left">291</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg309" style="text-align: left">309</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            story of his visit to Rome, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxxvi</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            story of his residence at Cambridge, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxxvi</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his writings, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxvii" style="text-align: left">xxxvii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg311" style="text-align: left">311</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            list of his literary works and compilations, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg386" style="text-align: left">386-389</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his studies, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxvii" style="text-align: left">xxxvii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg386" style="text-align: left">386-389</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his duties, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxvii" style="text-align: left">xxxvii</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his character, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxvii" style="text-align: left">xxxvii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxviii" style="text-align: left">xxxviii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxix" style="text-align: left">xxxix</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his zeal for Catholic usages, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxviii" style="text-align: left">xxxviii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxix" style="text-align: left">xxxix</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his admiration for Aidan, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxix" style="text-align: left">xxxix</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            dictates to Wilbert his translation of St. John and St. Isidore,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxlii" style="text-align: left">xlii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxliii" style="text-align: left">xliii</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            buried at Jarrow, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxl" style="text-align: left">xl</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his relics stolen by Elfred and carried to Durham, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxl" style="text-align: left">xl</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            translated with those of St. Cuthbert to the new Cathedral,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxl" style="text-align: left">xl</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            a shrine erected to him by Hugh de Puisac, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxl" style="text-align: left">xl</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his chronology corrected, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg009" style="text-align: left">9</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg011" style="text-align: left">11</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg012" style="text-align: left">12</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg013" style="text-align: left">13</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg020" style="text-align: left">20</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg022" style="text-align: left">22</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg023" style="text-align: left">23</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg027" style="text-align: left">27</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg028" style="text-align: left">28</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg029" style="text-align: left">29</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg042" style="text-align: left">42</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg063" style="text-align: left">63</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg068" style="text-align: left">68</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg075" style="text-align: left">75</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg094" style="text-align: left">94</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg241" style="text-align: left">241</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg254" style="text-align: left">254</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg287" style="text-align: left">287</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg314" style="text-align: left">314</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Martyrology,”</span> editorial references to,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg027" style="text-align: left">27</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg099" style="text-align: left">99</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg265" style="text-align: left">265</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his friendship for Acca, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg161" style="text-align: left">161</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“De
            Temporibus,”</span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg170" style="text-align: left">170</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“De temporum
            Ratione,”</span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg170" style="text-align: left">170</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg227" style="text-align: left">227</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“History of
            the Abbots,”</span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg213" style="text-align: left">213</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg215" style="text-align: left">215</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg257" style="text-align: left">257</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg287" style="text-align: left">287</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            uses the Caesarean system of Indictions, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg227" style="text-align: left">227</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“De Locis
            Santis,”</span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg337" style="text-align: left">337</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg338" style="text-align: left">338</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            said to have written Ceolfrid's Letter to Naiton, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg360" style="text-align: left">360</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Expositio
            in Marci Evangelium,”</span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg364" style="text-align: left">364</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Ecclesiastical History,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ecclesiastical-History" style="text-align: left">Ecclesiastical</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bega, Irish Saint, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg271" style="text-align: left">271</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg275" style="text-align: left">275</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Begu, a nun, has a vision of Hilda's death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg275" style="text-align: left">275</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg276" style="text-align: left">276</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Belgium, or Belgic Gaul, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg005" style="text-align: left">5</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg013" style="text-align: left">13</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Benedict I, Pope, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg083" style="text-align: left">83</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Benedict-Biscop"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Benedict Biscop, Abbot of Wearmouth, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg215" style="text-align: left">215</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg359" style="text-align: left">359</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg389" style="text-align: left">389</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Bede trained under, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxiii" style="text-align: left">xxxiii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg386" style="text-align: left">386</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            founds the monasteries of Wearmouth and Jarrow, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxxiv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg257" style="text-align: left">257</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his library, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxv" style="text-align: left">xxxv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg257" style="text-align: left">257</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg287" style="text-align: left">287</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            temporary abbot of SS. Peter and Paul's Monastery, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg216" style="text-align: left">216</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            goes to Rome, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg257" style="text-align: left">257</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg348" style="text-align: left">348</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            account of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg257" style="text-align: left">257</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            brings John the Precentor back with him to Britain, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg257" style="text-align: left">257</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg258" style="text-align: left">258</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            obtains a letter of privilege for his monastery, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg257" style="text-align: left">257</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg258" style="text-align: left">258</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his monastic rule, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg257" style="text-align: left">257</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Benedictus Crispus, Archbishop of Milan, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg313" style="text-align: left">313</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Benedictine Order of Monks, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg275" style="text-align: left">275</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Beneventum, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg021" style="text-align: left">21</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Benjamin, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg073" style="text-align: left">73</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Beornred"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Beornred, King of Mercia, said to have murdered Ethelbald,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg392" style="text-align: left">392</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Berct"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Berct, Berctred, Brectrid or Briht, Egfrid's General, lays
            Ireland waste, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg285" style="text-align: left">285</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg336" style="text-align: left">336</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            slain by the Picts, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg385" style="text-align: left">385</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Berecingum, or Barking, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Barking" style="text-align: left">Barking</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Berkshire, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg010" style="text-align: left">10</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg343" style="text-align: left">343</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bernicia, History of, xxvi, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg082" style="text-align: left">82</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg083" style="text-align: left">83</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg120" style="text-align: left">120</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg137" style="text-align: left">137</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg141" style="text-align: left">141</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg147" style="text-align: left">147</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg190" style="text-align: left">190</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            diocese of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg244" style="text-align: left">244</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bernicia, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Eata" style="text-align: left">Eata</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bernicia, King of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Eanfrid-Bernicia" style="text-align: left">Eanfrid</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ethelric" style="text-align: left">Ethelric</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ida" style="text-align: left">Ida</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Oswald" style="text-align: left">Oswald</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Oswy" style="text-align: left">Oswy</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bernwin, Wilfrid's nephew, his mission to the Isle of Wight,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg252" style="text-align: left">252</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bersted, Witenagemot of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg316" style="text-align: left">316</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bertfrid, Osrid's Ealdorman, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg385" style="text-align: left">385</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bertgils, surnamed Boniface, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Boniface-Bertgils" style="text-align: left">Boniface</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bertha, daughter of Charibert, wife of Ethelbert of Kent,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg046" style="text-align: left">46</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg048" style="text-align: left">48</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg094" style="text-align: left">94</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg095" style="text-align: left">95</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg132" style="text-align: left">132</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Berthun, Ethelwalch's Ealdorman, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg251" style="text-align: left">251</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Berthun"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Berthun, Abbot of Beverley, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg273" style="text-align: left">273</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg302" style="text-align: left">302</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg303" style="text-align: left">303</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg305" style="text-align: left">305</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Bertwald"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bertwald, Archbishop of Canterbury after Theodore, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxx" style="text-align: left">xxx</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxi" style="text-align: left">xxxi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg239" style="text-align: left">239</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg314" style="text-align: left">314</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg315" style="text-align: left">315</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg343" style="text-align: left">343</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg344" style="text-align: left">344</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg353" style="text-align: left">353</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his burial place, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg090" style="text-align: left">90</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his election and consecration, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg274" style="text-align: left">274</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg316" style="text-align: left">316</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg323" style="text-align: left">323</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Abbot of Reculver, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page401">[pg
            401]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" style="text-align: left" id="Pg401"/> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg315" style="text-align: left">315</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his learning, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg315" style="text-align: left">315</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            ordains Tobias, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg316" style="text-align: left">316</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            returns from the Continent, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg323" style="text-align: left">323</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            reconciled to Wilfrid, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg354" style="text-align: left">354</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg355" style="text-align: left">355</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg356" style="text-align: left">356</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            at the Synod on the Nidd, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg356" style="text-align: left">356</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            consecrates Aldwulf, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg378" style="text-align: left">378</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg378" style="text-align: left">378</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg386" style="text-align: left">386</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Berwickshire, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg260" style="text-align: left">260</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Betendune, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Watton" style="text-align: left">Watton</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bethlehem, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg338" style="text-align: left">338</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg339" style="text-align: left">339</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Betti, a Northumbrian priest, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvii" style="text-align: left">xxvii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg180" style="text-align: left">180</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg181" style="text-align: left">181</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Beverley, Inderauuda, or In the Wood of the Deiri, Monastery of,
            founded by John and Berthun, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg273" style="text-align: left">273</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg303" style="text-align: left">303</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg307" style="text-align: left">307</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Beverley, Abbot of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Berthun" style="text-align: left">Berthun</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-John-Beverley" style="text-align: left">John</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bewcastle, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg163" style="text-align: left">163</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Birinus"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Birinus, Bishop of Dorchester, converts the West Saxons, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxvi</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg147" style="text-align: left">147</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg148" style="text-align: left">148</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg241" style="text-align: left">241</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            consecrated by Asterius, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg148" style="text-align: left">148</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg148" style="text-align: left">148</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            buried at Dorchester, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg148" style="text-align: left">148</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his body translated to Winchester, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg148" style="text-align: left">148</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg149" style="text-align: left">149</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Biscop, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Benedict-Biscop" style="text-align: left">Benedict</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Bishop-Burton"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bishop Burton, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg307" style="text-align: left">307</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bishops, rules for, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg049" style="text-align: left">49</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg050" style="text-align: left">50</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg228" style="text-align: left">228</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg229" style="text-align: left">229</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            their stipends, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg049" style="text-align: left">49</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg050" style="text-align: left">50</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            consecration of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg053" style="text-align: left">53</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg054" style="text-align: left">54</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg065" style="text-align: left">65</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg085" style="text-align: left">85</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bishoprics, English, List of in 731 <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg379" style="text-align: left">379</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            subdivision of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg122" style="text-align: left">122</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg229" style="text-align: left">229</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg231" style="text-align: left">231</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg242" style="text-align: left">242-4</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg272" style="text-align: left">272</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg273" style="text-align: left">273</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg343" style="text-align: left">343</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Bisi"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bisi, Bishop of Dunwich after Boniface, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg227" style="text-align: left">227</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg228" style="text-align: left">228</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg230" style="text-align: left">230</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Blackwater, the River, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg183" style="text-align: left">183</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Blaecca, Reeve of Lincoln, converted, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg122" style="text-align: left">122</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bledla, King of the Huns, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg027" style="text-align: left">27</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Blessed Mother of God, Church of the, at Lastingham, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg187" style="text-align: left">187</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            at Barking, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg237" style="text-align: left">237</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            in St. Augustine's, Canterbury, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg357" style="text-align: left">357</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Blithryda"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Blithryda, or Plectrude, wife of Pippin, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg324" style="text-align: left">324</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Blood-letting, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg305" style="text-align: left">305</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg306" style="text-align: left">306</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bobbio, Monastery of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg092" style="text-align: left">92</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Boethius referred to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg145" style="text-align: left">145</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Boisil"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Boisil, Provost of Melrose, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg288" style="text-align: left">288</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            teaches Cuthbert, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg288" style="text-align: left">288</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg289" style="text-align: left">289</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg292" style="text-align: left">292</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg289" style="text-align: left">289</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            appears to one of his disciples in dreams, and forbids Egbert to
            go to the Germans, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg317" style="text-align: left">317</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg318" style="text-align: left">318</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg319" style="text-align: left">319</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Boniface IV, Pope, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg092" style="text-align: left">92</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg093" style="text-align: left">93</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his pastoral letters to the English Church, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg093" style="text-align: left">93</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Boniface V, Pope, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxv" style="text-align: left">xxv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg112" style="text-align: left">112</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg124" style="text-align: left">124</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his letters, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg098" style="text-align: left">98</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg100" style="text-align: left">100</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg101" style="text-align: left">101</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg105" style="text-align: left">105</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg111" style="text-align: left">111</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg380" style="text-align: left">380</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            sends the pall to Justus, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg100" style="text-align: left">100</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            sends gifts to Edwin, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg109" style="text-align: left">109</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            to Ethelberg, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg111" style="text-align: left">111</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg105" style="text-align: left">105</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Boniface, St., editorial references to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg003" style="text-align: left">3</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg087" style="text-align: left">87</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg179" style="text-align: left">179</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg237" style="text-align: left">237</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg324" style="text-align: left">324</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg325" style="text-align: left">325</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg342" style="text-align: left">342</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg346" style="text-align: left">346</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg391" style="text-align: left">391</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his martyrdom, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg392" style="text-align: left">392</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            account of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg392" style="text-align: left">392</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Boniface-Bertgils"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Boniface, or Bertgils, Bishop of Dunwich, or of the East Angles,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg179" style="text-align: left">179</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg206" style="text-align: left">206</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg207" style="text-align: left">207</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg230" style="text-align: left">230</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Boniface, the Archdeacon, Pope's Counsellor at Wilfrid's second
            trial, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg349" style="text-align: left">349</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg354" style="text-align: left">354</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Boniface (probably St. Cuiritin), missionary, converts Naiton to
            Roman usages, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg359" style="text-align: left">359</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bordeaux, Pilgrim of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg340" style="text-align: left">340</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Borrowdale, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg294" style="text-align: left">294</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Boructuari, The, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg245" style="text-align: left">245</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg317" style="text-align: left">317</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            converted by Suidbert, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg324" style="text-align: left">324</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Bosa"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bosa, Bishop of Deira or York, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg243" style="text-align: left">243</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg244" style="text-align: left">244</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg358" style="text-align: left">358</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            account of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg243" style="text-align: left">243</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            consecrated in Wilfrid's place, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg244" style="text-align: left">244</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg385" style="text-align: left">385</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            educated at Whitby under Hilda, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg272" style="text-align: left">272</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg273" style="text-align: left">273</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg305" style="text-align: left">305</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg356" style="text-align: left">356</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Bosel"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bosel, Bishop of Worcester, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg273" style="text-align: left">273</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg274" style="text-align: left">274</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bosham, or Bosanhamm, Monastery of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg246" style="text-align: left">246</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bothelm, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg137" style="text-align: left">137</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg138" style="text-align: left">138</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Boulogne"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Boulogne, or Gessoriacum, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg005" style="text-align: left">5</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg013" style="text-align: left">13</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg072" style="text-align: left">72</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg073" style="text-align: left">73</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bowmont Water, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg120" style="text-align: left">120</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bowness-on-Solway, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg025" style="text-align: left">25</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Boy, a Saxon, his dying vision of SS. Peter and Paul, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg248" style="text-align: left">248</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg249" style="text-align: left">249</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg250" style="text-align: left">250</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg251" style="text-align: left">251</a>.
          </div>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page402">[pg 402]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg402"/>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bradford-on-Avon, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg210" style="text-align: left">210</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Bredon"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bredon, or Briudun, monastery of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg379" style="text-align: left">379</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bregusuid, mother of Hilda, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg274" style="text-align: left">274</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bretwalda, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Aelli" style="text-align: left">Aelli</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Caelin" style="text-align: left">Caelin</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Edwin" style="text-align: left">Edwin</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ethelbert" style="text-align: left">Ethelbert</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Oswald" style="text-align: left">Oswald</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Oswy" style="text-align: left">Oswy</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Redwald" style="text-align: left">Redwald</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Bridius"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bridius, or Bruide Mac Maelchon, King of the Picts, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg141" style="text-align: left">141</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg142" style="text-align: left">142</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Brige"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Brige, In Brige, or Faremoûtier-en-Brie, monastery of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg151" style="text-align: left">151</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg152" style="text-align: left">152</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Brige, Abbess of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Fara" style="text-align: left">Fara</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ethelberg-Brige" style="text-align: left">Ethelberg</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Saethryth" style="text-align: left">Saethryth</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bright, his <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Early English Church History,”</span> vi;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            references to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg012" style="text-align: left">12</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg051" style="text-align: left">51</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg084" style="text-align: left">84</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg105" style="text-align: left">105</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg121" style="text-align: left">121</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg148" style="text-align: left">148</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg151" style="text-align: left">151</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg183" style="text-align: left">183</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg195" style="text-align: left">195</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg214" style="text-align: left">214</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg242" style="text-align: left">242</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg251" style="text-align: left">251</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg292" style="text-align: left">292</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg326" style="text-align: left">326</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Briht, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Berct" style="text-align: left">Berct</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Britain, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiii" style="text-align: left">xxiii</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Roman occupation of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiii" style="text-align: left">xxiii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg009" style="text-align: left">9-23</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            description of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg005" style="text-align: left">5</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg006" style="text-align: left">6</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            language, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg006" style="text-align: left">6</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg080" style="text-align: left">80</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            freed from Roman rule, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg022" style="text-align: left">22</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg023" style="text-align: left">23</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg026" style="text-align: left">26</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg382" style="text-align: left">382</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            the Romans return to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg024" style="text-align: left">24</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            its corruption during peace, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg028" style="text-align: left">28</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg041" style="text-align: left">41</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg042" style="text-align: left">42</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            suffers from a plague, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg028" style="text-align: left">28</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg029" style="text-align: left">29</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            overrun by the Angles and Saxons, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg029" style="text-align: left">29</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg031" style="text-align: left">31</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg032" style="text-align: left">32</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            civil wars in, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg041" style="text-align: left">41</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            converted to Christianity, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg080" style="text-align: left">80</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Britain, Church of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-British" style="text-align: left">British</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Britain, King of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Lucius-Britain" style="text-align: left">Lucius</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Britannicus, son of Claudius, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg011" style="text-align: left">11</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-British"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            British Church, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiii" style="text-align: left">xxiii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxiv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxix" style="text-align: left">xxxix</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg019" style="text-align: left">19</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg054" style="text-align: left">54</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg055" style="text-align: left">55</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg086" style="text-align: left">86</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg092" style="text-align: left">92</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            its attitude towards the Easter question, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxiv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg091" style="text-align: left">91</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg196" style="text-align: left">196</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg336" style="text-align: left">336</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg344" style="text-align: left">344</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg376" style="text-align: left">376</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg381" style="text-align: left">381</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            refuses allegiance to Augustine, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg087" style="text-align: left">87</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            approached by Laurentius, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg092" style="text-align: left">92</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            British Museum, The, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg331" style="text-align: left">331</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Britons"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Britons, or Brythons, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxi" style="text-align: left">xxxi</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            defeated by Ethelfrid, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxiv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg073" style="text-align: left">73</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            origin of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg006" style="text-align: left">6</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg007" style="text-align: left">7</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            language, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg006" style="text-align: left">6</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Britons of Strathclyde, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg286" style="text-align: left">286</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg336" style="text-align: left">336</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Britons of Strathclyde, King of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Theudor" style="text-align: left">Theudor</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Brittany, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg007" style="text-align: left">7</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Briudun, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Bredon" style="text-align: left">Bredon</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Brocmail, Welsh Prince, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg088" style="text-align: left">88</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bromnis, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg352" style="text-align: left">352</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bructeri, The, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg317" style="text-align: left">317</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bruide, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Bridius" style="text-align: left">Bridius</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Bruide-Mac-Bili"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bruide Mac Bili, King of the Picts, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg285" style="text-align: left">285</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Brythons, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Britons" style="text-align: left">Britons</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Buckinghamshire, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg010" style="text-align: left">10</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bulgarians, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg317" style="text-align: left">317</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Burford, Battle of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg380" style="text-align: left">380</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg392" style="text-align: left">392</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Burgh Castle, Monastery of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg174" style="text-align: left">174</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg177" style="text-align: left">177</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Burgh-Castle"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Burgh Castle, Abbot of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Fursa" style="text-align: left">Fursa</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Burghelm, a priest of Wilfrid's, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg245" style="text-align: left">245</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Burgundians, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg092" style="text-align: left">92</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Burgundofarus, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Faro" style="text-align: left">Faro</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Burgundy, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg122" style="text-align: left">122</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Burton, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Bishop-Burton" style="text-align: left">Bishop</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-North-Burton" style="text-align: left">North</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-South-Burton" style="text-align: left">South</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Bury, Professor, his <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Life of St. Patrick,”</span> reference to,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg027" style="text-align: left">27</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Butler, his <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Lives of the Saints,”</span> reference to,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg388" style="text-align: left">388</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Cadvan"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cadvan, father of Caedwalla the Briton, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg130" style="text-align: left">130</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cadwalader, son of Caedwalla the Briton, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg241" style="text-align: left">241</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cadwallon, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Caedwalla-Cadwallon" style="text-align: left">Caedwalla</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Caedmon, the Poet, his life and death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg277" style="text-align: left">277-281</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Caedwalla-Cadwallon"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Caedwalla, or Cadwallon, King of Gwynedd in Wales, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxv" style="text-align: left">xxv</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg241" style="text-align: left">241</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            account of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg130" style="text-align: left">130</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his revolt against Edwin, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg130" style="text-align: left">130</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg131" style="text-align: left">131</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            allied with Penda, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg130" style="text-align: left">130</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his cruelty, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg131" style="text-align: left">131</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg135" style="text-align: left">135</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            a Christian, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg131" style="text-align: left">131</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            besieged by Osric in York, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg134" style="text-align: left">134</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg135" style="text-align: left">135</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            kills Osric, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg134" style="text-align: left">134</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg135" style="text-align: left">135</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            kills Eanfrid by treachery, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg135" style="text-align: left">135</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            slain by Oswald, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg135" style="text-align: left">135</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Caedwalla-Wessex"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Caedwalla, King of Wessex, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxx" style="text-align: left">xxx</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg287" style="text-align: left">287</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg353" style="text-align: left">353</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            account of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg241" style="text-align: left">241</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            in exile, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg251" style="text-align: left">251</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            kills Ethelwalch in battle, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg251" style="text-align: left">251</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            expelled by Andhun and Berthun, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg251" style="text-align: left">251</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            kills Berthun, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg251" style="text-align: left">251</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            conquers and reunites Wessex, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg241" style="text-align: left">241</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg251" style="text-align: left">251</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg252" style="text-align: left">252</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            conquers the South Saxons and the Isle of Wight, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg252" style="text-align: left">252</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg253" style="text-align: left">253</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his relations with Wilfrid, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg252" style="text-align: left">252</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            kills <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page404">[pg
            404]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" style="text-align: left" id="Pg404"/> Arwald's brothers, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg252" style="text-align: left">252</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg253" style="text-align: left">253</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            in concealment at Redbridge, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg253" style="text-align: left">253</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            wounded in the Isle of Wight, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg253" style="text-align: left">253</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            abdicates, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg241" style="text-align: left">241</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg345" style="text-align: left">345</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his pilgrimage to Rome, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg241" style="text-align: left">241</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg312" style="text-align: left">312</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg313" style="text-align: left">313</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg314" style="text-align: left">314</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg345" style="text-align: left">345</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg385" style="text-align: left">385</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            baptized under the name of Peter, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg312" style="text-align: left">312</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg313" style="text-align: left">313</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            dies at Rome, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg241" style="text-align: left">241</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg312" style="text-align: left">312</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg314" style="text-align: left">314</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            buried in St. Peter's, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg313" style="text-align: left">313</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his epitaph, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg313" style="text-align: left">313</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg314" style="text-align: left">314</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Caelin"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Caelin, or Ceaulin, King of the West Saxons, second Bretwalda,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg094" style="text-align: left">94</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg241" style="text-align: left">241</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Caelin, brother of Cedd, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg185" style="text-align: left">185</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg187" style="text-align: left">187</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Caerleon"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Caerleon-on-Usk, or City of Legions, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg018" style="text-align: left">18</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Caesar"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Caesar, Caius Julius, editorial references to his works, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg005" style="text-align: left">5</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg010" style="text-align: left">10</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his invasion of Britain, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg009" style="text-align: left">9</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg010" style="text-align: left">10</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg011" style="text-align: left">11</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg023" style="text-align: left">23</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg382" style="text-align: left">382</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            returns to Gaul, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg010" style="text-align: left">10</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Caesarea, library of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg369" style="text-align: left">369</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Eusebius-Pamphili" style="text-align: left">Eusebius</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Caesarean System of Indictions, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg227" style="text-align: left">227</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg254" style="text-align: left">254</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Caiaphas, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg335" style="text-align: left">335</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cairbre Riada, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Reuda" style="text-align: left">Reuda</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Caistor"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Caistor, or Cyneburgacaster, Abbess of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Cyneburg" style="text-align: left">Cyneburg</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Calcaria"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Calcaria, or Kaelcacaestir, now Tadcaster, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg271" style="text-align: left">271</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg272" style="text-align: left">272</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cale, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Chelles" style="text-align: left">Chelles</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Caledonians, the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg014" style="text-align: left">14</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cambridge, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxix" style="text-align: left">xix</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg172" style="text-align: left">172</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg261" style="text-align: left">261</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cambridgeshire, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg112" style="text-align: left">112</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg179" style="text-align: left">179</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg259" style="text-align: left">259</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Campania, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg021" style="text-align: left">21</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg214" style="text-align: left">214</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg388" style="text-align: left">388</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Campodonum"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Campodonum, or Donafeld, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg120" style="text-align: left">120</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Canche, the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg215" style="text-align: left">215</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Candidus, a presbyter, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg044" style="text-align: left">44</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cannes, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg033" style="text-align: left">33</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Canons of the Western Church, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg228" style="text-align: left">228</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Canterbury"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Canterbury, or Doruvernis, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg047" style="text-align: left">47</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg048" style="text-align: left">48</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg049" style="text-align: left">49</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg210" style="text-align: left">210</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg254" style="text-align: left">254</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg255" style="text-align: left">255</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg379" style="text-align: left">379</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            churches of, xxii, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg003" style="text-align: left">3</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg051" style="text-align: left">51</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg072" style="text-align: left">72</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            see of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg049" style="text-align: left">49</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg379" style="text-align: left">379</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            monastery at, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg072" style="text-align: left">72</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            almost destroyed by fire, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg099" style="text-align: left">99</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            school of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg121" style="text-align: left">121</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg316" style="text-align: left">316</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg343" style="text-align: left">343</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Canterbury, Archbishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Anselm" style="text-align: left">Anselm</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Augustine" style="text-align: left">Augustine</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Bertwald" style="text-align: left">Bertwald</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Cuthbert-Archbishop" style="text-align: left">Cuthbert</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Deusdedit-Archbishop" style="text-align: left">Deusdedit</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Honorius-Archbishop" style="text-align: left">Honorius</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Justus" style="text-align: left">Justus</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Lanfranc" style="text-align: left">Lanfranc</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Laurentius-Archbishop" style="text-align: left">Laurentius</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Mellitus" style="text-align: left">Mellitus</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Nothelm" style="text-align: left">Nothelm</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Tatwine" style="text-align: left">Tatwine</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Theodore-Archbishop" style="text-align: left">Theodore</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cantuarians, the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg133" style="text-align: left">133</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cantuarii, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg245" style="text-align: left">245</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cantus Ambrosianus, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg133" style="text-align: left">133</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cantus Romanus, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg133" style="text-align: left">133</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cantyre, or Kintyre, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg008" style="text-align: left">8</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg142" style="text-align: left">142</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Caracalla, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Antonius-Bassianus" style="text-align: left">Antonius Bassianus</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Carausius, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg013" style="text-align: left">13</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg014" style="text-align: left">14</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Carlegion, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Chester" style="text-align: left">Chester</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Carlisle"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Carlisle, Luel, or Lugubalia, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg073" style="text-align: left">73</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg285" style="text-align: left">285</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg294" style="text-align: left">294</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Carlisle, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Appleby" style="text-align: left">Appleby</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Carloman"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Carloman, King of the Franks, son of Charles Martel, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg391" style="text-align: left">391</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg392" style="text-align: left">392</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Carmen
            Paschale,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Sedulius" style="text-align: left">Sedulius</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Carpophorus, St., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg099" style="text-align: left">99</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Carriden (probably Urbs Iudeu), <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg023" style="text-align: left">23</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg189" style="text-align: left">189</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cassobellaunus, chief of the Catuvellauni, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg010" style="text-align: left">10</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Catterick Bridge, Cataract, or Cataractonium, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg120" style="text-align: left">120</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg132" style="text-align: left">132</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg164" style="text-align: left">164</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Catuvellauni, the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg010" style="text-align: left">10</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Ceadda"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ceadda, or Chad, St., afterwards Bishop of Lichfield and York,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvii" style="text-align: left">xxvii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg003" style="text-align: left">3</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg384" style="text-align: left">384</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Abbot of Lastingham, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxv" style="text-align: left">xxxv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg187" style="text-align: left">187</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            consecrated Bishop of York in Wilfrid's place, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg206" style="text-align: left">206</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg207" style="text-align: left">207</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg351" style="text-align: left">351</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            reconsecrated by Theodore, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg207" style="text-align: left">207</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg217" style="text-align: left">217</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            on Wilfrid's return retires to Lastingham, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg218" style="text-align: left">218</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg351" style="text-align: left">351</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            made Bishop of Lichfield, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg192" style="text-align: left">192</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg218" style="text-align: left">218</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg219" style="text-align: left">219</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            a disciple of Aidan, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg208" style="text-align: left">208</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his holy life, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg207" style="text-align: left">207</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg219" style="text-align: left">219</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg222" style="text-align: left">222</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg223" style="text-align: left">223</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            builds the monastery of Ad Barvae, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg219" style="text-align: left">219</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            account of his death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxviii" style="text-align: left">xxxviii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg219" style="text-align: left">219</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg222" style="text-align: left">222</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg224" style="text-align: left">224</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            buried at Lichfield, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg219" style="text-align: left">219</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg224" style="text-align: left">224</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his posthumous miracles, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg224" style="text-align: left">224</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his relics, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg224" style="text-align: left">224</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Cearl"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cearl, King of Mercia, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg119" style="text-align: left">119</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ceaulin, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Caelin" style="text-align: left">Caelin</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cecilia, St., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg265" style="text-align: left">265</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg324" style="text-align: left">324</a>.
          </div>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page405">[pg 405]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg405"/>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Cedd"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cedd, afterwards Bishop of Essex, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvii" style="text-align: left">xxvii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg003" style="text-align: left">3</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg183" style="text-align: left">183</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg206" style="text-align: left">206</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg207" style="text-align: left">207</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg208" style="text-align: left">208</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his mission to Mid-Anglia, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg180" style="text-align: left">180</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg181" style="text-align: left">181</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            reconverts the East Saxons, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg182" style="text-align: left">182</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg183" style="text-align: left">183</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            excommunicates a <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“gesith”</span> for his unlawful marriage,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg184" style="text-align: left">184</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            rebukes King Sigbert and prophecies his death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg184" style="text-align: left">184</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            baptizes King Suidhelm, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg184" style="text-align: left">184</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg185" style="text-align: left">185</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            visits Northumbria, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg185" style="text-align: left">185</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his self-imposed discipline, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg186" style="text-align: left">186</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            founds the monastery of Lastingham, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg185" style="text-align: left">185</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg186" style="text-align: left">186</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his brothers, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg185" style="text-align: left">185</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg186" style="text-align: left">186</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg187" style="text-align: left">187</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg185" style="text-align: left">185</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg186" style="text-align: left">186</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            burial, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg186" style="text-align: left">186</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg187" style="text-align: left">187</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            trained at Lindisfarne, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg186" style="text-align: left">186</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            posthumous miracle, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg187" style="text-align: left">187</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            at Whitby, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg195" style="text-align: left">195</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            forsakes the Celtic Easter, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg201" style="text-align: left">201</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his spirit appears at the time of Ceadda's death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg224" style="text-align: left">224</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Celestine, or Celestinus, Pope, sends Palladius to the Irish,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg027" style="text-align: left">27</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg033" style="text-align: left">33</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg382" style="text-align: left">382</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg383" style="text-align: left">383</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Celtic Churches, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiii" style="text-align: left">xxiii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxiv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxx" style="text-align: left">xxx</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxi" style="text-align: left">xxxi</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            and <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-British" style="text-align: left">British Church</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Irish-Church" style="text-align: left">Irish Church</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Celtic Missions, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxv" style="text-align: left">xxv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxx" style="text-align: left">xxx</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg139" style="text-align: left">139</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Celtic
            Scotland,”</span> Skene's, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Skene" style="text-align: left">Skene</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Celts, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg007" style="text-align: left">7</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            their observance of Easter, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg084" style="text-align: left">84</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg087" style="text-align: left">87</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            and <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Easter-Controversy" style="text-align: left">Easter Controversy</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Centwine"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Centwine, sub-king of Wessex, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg241" style="text-align: left">241</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg352" style="text-align: left">352</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his wife, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg352" style="text-align: left">352</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Ceolfrid"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ceolfrid, Abbot of Wearmouth and Jarrow, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxx" style="text-align: left">xxx</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxxiv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxv" style="text-align: left">xxxv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg387" style="text-align: left">387</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg389" style="text-align: left">389</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            educates Bede, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxiii" style="text-align: left">xxxiii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg386" style="text-align: left">386</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            enlarges the library of Wearmouth and Jarrow, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxv" style="text-align: left">xxxv</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Pope Sergius' letter to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxxvi</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            account of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg257" style="text-align: left">257</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            sends builders to Naiton, King of the Picts, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg359" style="text-align: left">359</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his letter to Naiton (said to be written by Bede), <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg360" style="text-align: left">360-374</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Ceollach"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ceollach, Bishop of Mid-Anglia and Mercia, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg181" style="text-align: left">181</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg191" style="text-align: left">191</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Ceolred"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ceolred, King of Mercia, son of Ethelred, succeeds Coinred,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg346" style="text-align: left">346</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his bad character, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg346" style="text-align: left">346</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg346" style="text-align: left">346</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg380" style="text-align: left">380</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg386" style="text-align: left">386</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his enmity to Ethelbald, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg380" style="text-align: left">380</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Ceolwulf"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ceolwulf, King of Northumbria, brother of Coenred, succeeds
            Osric, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxi" style="text-align: left">xxxi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg375" style="text-align: left">375</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg381" style="text-align: left">381</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Ecclesiastical
            History”</span> dedicated to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxii" style="text-align: left">xxii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg001" style="text-align: left">1</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            account of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg001" style="text-align: left">1</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            taken prisoner, tonsured, and sent back to his kingdom, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg390" style="text-align: left">390</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            leaves the kingdom to Eadbert, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg391" style="text-align: left">391</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Cerdic"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cerdic, British King, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg274" style="text-align: left">274</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cerot, Island of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg232" style="text-align: left">232</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cerotaesei, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Chertsey" style="text-align: left">Chertsey</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Chad, St., <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ceadda" style="text-align: left">Ceadda</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Chalcedon, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg265" style="text-align: left">265</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            council of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg228" style="text-align: left">228</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg254" style="text-align: left">254</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Chaldeans, the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg031" style="text-align: left">31</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Charibert"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Charibert, King of Paris, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg046" style="text-align: left">46</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg132" style="text-align: left">132</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Charles"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Charles Martel, King of the Franks, defeats the Saracens,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg378" style="text-align: left">378</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            supports Boniface's mission, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg392" style="text-align: left">392</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg391" style="text-align: left">391</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Charybdis, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg365" style="text-align: left">365</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Chauci, the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg317" style="text-align: left">317</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Chelles"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Chelles, or Cale, monastery of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg152" style="text-align: left">152</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg271" style="text-align: left">271</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg349" style="text-align: left">349</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Chepstow, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg084" style="text-align: left">84</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Chertsey"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Chertsey, Cerotaesei, or the Island of Cerot, monastery of,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxviii" style="text-align: left">xxviii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg232" style="text-align: left">232</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cherusci, the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg317" style="text-align: left">317</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cheshire, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg204" style="text-align: left">204</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Chester"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Chester, Carlegion, City of Legions, or Legacaestir, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg018" style="text-align: left">18</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Battle of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxiv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg087" style="text-align: left">87</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg088" style="text-align: left">88</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Chester-le-Street"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Chester-le-Street, or Cunungaceaster, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg295" style="text-align: left">295</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg325" style="text-align: left">325</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Chichester, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg246" style="text-align: left">246</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg247" style="text-align: left">247</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Childebert"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Childebert, King of Austrasia and Burgundy, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg049" style="text-align: left">49</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Chilperic"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Chilperic, King of Neustria, brother of Charibert, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg132" style="text-align: left">132</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Chosroes"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Chosroes II, King of Persia, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg340" style="text-align: left">340</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Chrism, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg087" style="text-align: left">87</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Christ Church Cathedral, Canterbury, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg072" style="text-align: left">72</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Christians, persecuted under Diocletian <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page406">[pg 406]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" style="text-align: left" id="Pg406"/> and Maximian,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg014" style="text-align: left">14-19</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            under Nero, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg014" style="text-align: left">14</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Christmas"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Christmas, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg206" style="text-align: left">206</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Chronological
            Recapitulation of the whole Work,”</span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg382" style="text-align: left">382</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">et seq.</span></span>
</div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Church Furniture, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg065" style="text-align: left">65</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Music, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg133" style="text-align: left">133</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg358" style="text-align: left">358</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg386" style="text-align: left">386</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Church
            Historians,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Stevenson" style="text-align: left">Stevenson</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Churches of Wood, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg170" style="text-align: left">170</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg192" style="text-align: left">192</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg360" style="text-align: left">360</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            of stone, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg192" style="text-align: left">192</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg359" style="text-align: left">359</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            covered with lead, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg192" style="text-align: left">192</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cilicia, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg214" style="text-align: left">214</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            City of Legions, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Caerleon" style="text-align: left">Caerleon</a> and
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Chester" style="text-align: left">Chester</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Claudius, Emperor, invades Britain and conquers the Orkneys,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg011" style="text-align: left">11</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg382" style="text-align: left">382</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Clement, St., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg091" style="text-align: left">91</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Clement, name given to Wilbrord, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg179" style="text-align: left">179</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg324" style="text-align: left">324</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Clergy, rules for, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg050" style="text-align: left">50</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg229" style="text-align: left">229</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Cliff-at-Hoe"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cliff-at-Hoe, Clofeshoch, or Clovesho, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg229" style="text-align: left">229</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg255" style="text-align: left">255</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Clonard, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg140" style="text-align: left">140</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Clonard, Abbot of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Colman-Columbanus" style="text-align: left">Colman or Columbanus</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Clothaire-III"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Clothaire III, King of Neustria, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg206" style="text-align: left">206</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg215" style="text-align: left">215</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg349" style="text-align: left">349</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Clothilde, wife of Clovis I, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg152" style="text-align: left">152</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Clovesho, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Cliff-at-Hoe" style="text-align: left">Cliff-at-Hoe</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Clovis-I"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Clovis I, King of the Franks, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg152" style="text-align: left">152</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Clovis-II"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Clovis II, King of Neustria, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg152" style="text-align: left">152</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg178" style="text-align: left">178</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg349" style="text-align: left">349</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Clyde, or Cluith, the river, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg024" style="text-align: left">24</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cnobheresburg, or Cnobhere's Town, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Burgh-Castle" style="text-align: left">Burgh Castle</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Coenred-Coinred"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Coenred, or Coinred, King of Mercia after Ethelred, son of
            Wulfhere, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxx" style="text-align: left">xxx</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg332" style="text-align: left">332</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg356" style="text-align: left">356</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg385" style="text-align: left">385</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his thegn's visions, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg332" style="text-align: left">332</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg333" style="text-align: left">333</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg334" style="text-align: left">334</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            gives up his throne and goes to Rome, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg345" style="text-align: left">345</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg346" style="text-align: left">346</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg385" style="text-align: left">385</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            becomes a monk, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg345" style="text-align: left">345</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg346" style="text-align: left">346</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            reconciled to Wilfrid, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg356" style="text-align: left">356</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Coenred-Northumbria"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Coenred, King of Northumbria, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg375" style="text-align: left">375</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg377" style="text-align: left">377</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg378" style="text-align: left">378</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Coenwald, Theodore's representative at Wilfrid's trial, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg352" style="text-align: left">352</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Coifi, a pagan priest converted to Christianity, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg116" style="text-align: left">116</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg117" style="text-align: left">117</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg118" style="text-align: left">118</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Coinwalch"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Coinwalch, King of Wessex, son of Cynegils, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg149" style="text-align: left">149</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg350" style="text-align: left">350</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            in exile in East Anglia, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg149" style="text-align: left">149</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            puts away his wife, Penda's sister, and marries another, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg149" style="text-align: left">149</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            restored to his kingdom, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg149" style="text-align: left">149</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his relations with Agilbert, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg149" style="text-align: left">149</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg150" style="text-align: left">150</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg241" style="text-align: left">241</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Coldingham-Coludi"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Coldingham, or Coludi, monastery of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxix" style="text-align: left">xxix</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg260" style="text-align: left">260</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg266" style="text-align: left">266</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg281" style="text-align: left">281</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg283" style="text-align: left">283</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg284" style="text-align: left">284</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Coldingham, Abbess of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Aebba" style="text-align: left">Aebba</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Coldstream, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg120" style="text-align: left">120</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Colman"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Colman, Bishop of Northumbria, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxviii" style="text-align: left">xxviii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg194" style="text-align: left">194</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg201" style="text-align: left">201</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            at the Whitby Synod, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg195" style="text-align: left">195</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg196" style="text-align: left">196</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg198" style="text-align: left">198</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg200" style="text-align: left">200</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            returns to Ireland, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg201" style="text-align: left">201</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg204" style="text-align: left">204</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg213" style="text-align: left">213</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg225" style="text-align: left">225</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg384" style="text-align: left">384</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            takes some of Aidan's bones with him, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg202" style="text-align: left">202</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his frugality and plain living, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg202" style="text-align: left">202</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg203" style="text-align: left">203</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            at Iona, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg225" style="text-align: left">225</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            at Innisboffin, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg225" style="text-align: left">225</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            at Mayo, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg225" style="text-align: left">225</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg226" style="text-align: left">226</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Colman-Columbanus"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Colman, or Columbanus, Irish bishop, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg128" style="text-align: left">128</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg129" style="text-align: left">129</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cologne, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg322" style="text-align: left">322</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Coludi, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Coldingham-Coludi" style="text-align: left">Coldingham</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Columba-Columcille"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Columba, or Columcille, St., Bishop of Iona, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg151" style="text-align: left">151</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg372" style="text-align: left">372</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his mission to the Picts, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxv" style="text-align: left">xxv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg140" style="text-align: left">140</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg141" style="text-align: left">141</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg142" style="text-align: left">142</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg359" style="text-align: left">359</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg383" style="text-align: left">383</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            converts King Bridius, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg142" style="text-align: left">142</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            account of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg140" style="text-align: left">140</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his name, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg140" style="text-align: left">140</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg318" style="text-align: left">318</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            founds the monastery of Iona, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg142" style="text-align: left">142</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg383" style="text-align: left">383</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            builds the monastery of Dearmach, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg142" style="text-align: left">142</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his rule and jurisdiction, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg142" style="text-align: left">142</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg143" style="text-align: left">143</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            records of him, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg143" style="text-align: left">143</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            miracles, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg199" style="text-align: left">199</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg200" style="text-align: left">200</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg142" style="text-align: left">142</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            buried at Iona, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg142" style="text-align: left">142</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Columba, St.,
            Life of,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Adamnan-Iona" style="text-align: left">Adamnan</a> and <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Reeves" style="text-align: left">Reeves</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Columban Monasteries, Egbert's mission to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg318" style="text-align: left">318</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg319" style="text-align: left">319</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg375" style="text-align: left">375</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Columbanus, Irish missionary to the continent, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg092" style="text-align: left">92</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Columbanus, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Colman-Columbanus" style="text-align: left">Colman</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Columcille, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Columba-Columcille" style="text-align: left">Columba</a>.
          </div>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page407">[pg 407]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg407"/>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Comb sent by Boniface to Ethelberg, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg111" style="text-align: left">111</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Comets, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxi" style="text-align: left">xxxi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg242" style="text-align: left">242</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg378" style="text-align: left">378</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg385" style="text-align: left">385</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg386" style="text-align: left">386</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Communion"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Communion, Holy, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg053" style="text-align: left">53</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg054" style="text-align: left">54</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg055" style="text-align: left">55</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg056" style="text-align: left">56</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg058" style="text-align: left">58</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg060" style="text-align: left">60</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg061" style="text-align: left">61</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg062" style="text-align: left">62</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg065" style="text-align: left">65</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg096" style="text-align: left">96</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg101" style="text-align: left">101</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg249" style="text-align: left">249</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg275" style="text-align: left">275</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg280" style="text-align: left">280</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg363" style="text-align: left">363</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Compiegne"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Compiègne, Royal Villa, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg206" style="text-align: left">206</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Conall"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Conall, King of the Dalriadic Scots, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg142" style="text-align: left">142</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Confirmation, the rite of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg087" style="text-align: left">87</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Connor, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Dima" style="text-align: left">Dima</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Conquest, the Norman, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg343" style="text-align: left">343</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Conrad, Prior of Canterbury, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg072" style="text-align: left">72</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Constans-II"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Constans II, or Constantine IV, Emperor, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg256" style="text-align: left">256</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Constans, son of Constantine, Tyrant of Britain, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg022" style="text-align: left">22</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Constantine I, Pope, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg345" style="text-align: left">345</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Constantine the Great, Emperor, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg019" style="text-align: left">19</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg210" style="text-align: left">210</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            establishes Christianity, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg070" style="text-align: left">70</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            completes the Basilica of the Anastasis, and builds the Church of
            the Martyrium, Jerusalem, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg339" style="text-align: left">339</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg340" style="text-align: left">340</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Constantine III, Emperor, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg127" style="text-align: left">127</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Constantine IV, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Constans-II" style="text-align: left">Constans II</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Constantine, Tyrant in Britain, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg022" style="text-align: left">22</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Constantinople"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Constantinople, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxviii" style="text-align: left">xxxviii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg027" style="text-align: left">27</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg077" style="text-align: left">77</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg254" style="text-align: left">254</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg338" style="text-align: left">338</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Church at, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg254" style="text-align: left">254</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            councils of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg254" style="text-align: left">254</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg255" style="text-align: left">255</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg256" style="text-align: left">256</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg258" style="text-align: left">258</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg352" style="text-align: left">352</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Constantinople, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Eudoxius" style="text-align: left">Eudoxius</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Macedonius" style="text-align: left">Macedonius</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Nestorius" style="text-align: left">Nestorius</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Constantinopolitan System of Indictions, the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg227" style="text-align: left">227</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Constantius, father of Constantine the Great, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg019" style="text-align: left">19</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Constantius, Count, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg022" style="text-align: left">22</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Constantius Chlorus, Emperor, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg014" style="text-align: left">14</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Constantius-Lyons"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Constantius of Lyons, his <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Life of Germanus,”</span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxii" style="text-align: left">xxii</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            editorial references to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg033" style="text-align: left">33</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg036" style="text-align: left">36</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg038" style="text-align: left">38</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Continuation of Bede, the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg390" style="text-align: left">390</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">et
            seq.</span></span>
</div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Conwulf"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Conwulf, Bishop of Lindisfarne, after Ethelwald, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg391" style="text-align: left">391</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Corinth, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg197" style="text-align: left">197</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Corinthians, Epistle to the, quoted, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg103" style="text-align: left">103</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg111" style="text-align: left">111</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg363" style="text-align: left">363</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Corman, his unsuccessful mission to the Northumbrians, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg145" style="text-align: left">145</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cornish Britons, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg007" style="text-align: left">7</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg336" style="text-align: left">336</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cornwall, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg033" style="text-align: left">33</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg084" style="text-align: left">84</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Corrib, Lough, monastery on, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg174" style="text-align: left">174</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Cotton
            MSS.,”</span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxix" style="text-align: left">xix</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Councils"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Councils, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg116" style="text-align: left">116</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg128" style="text-align: left">128</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg255" style="text-align: left">255</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg256" style="text-align: left">256</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            and <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Constantinople" style="text-align: left">Constantinople</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Rome" style="text-align: left">Rome</a>, and
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Synods" style="text-align: left">Synods</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cousins, marriage of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg052" style="text-align: left">52</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cricklade, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg084" style="text-align: left">84</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Crimea, the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg256" style="text-align: left">256</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Croes Oswallt, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Oswalds-Tree" style="text-align: left">Oswestry</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Cromanus"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cromanus, or Cronan, Bishop of Nendrum, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg129" style="text-align: left">129</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cross, The, in procession, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg046" style="text-align: left">46</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            sign of the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg304" style="text-align: left">304</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Invention of the Holy, by Helena, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg339" style="text-align: left">339</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg340" style="text-align: left">340</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cross, erected by Oswald, at Hefenfelth, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg136" style="text-align: left">136</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg137" style="text-align: left">137</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg138" style="text-align: left">138</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cross at Maserfelth, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg154" style="text-align: left">154</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cudwald, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Cuthbald-Cudwald" style="text-align: left">Cuthbald</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Cuichelm-Wessex"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cuichelm, King of Wessex, son of Cynegils, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg103" style="text-align: left">103</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg104" style="text-align: left">104</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg149" style="text-align: left">149</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Cuichelm-Rochester"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cuichelm, Bishop of Rochester after Putta, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg241" style="text-align: left">241</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg242" style="text-align: left">242</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cuiritin, Irish saint, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg359" style="text-align: left">359</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Culdees,
            The,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Reeves" style="text-align: left">Reeves</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cunningham, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg325" style="text-align: left">325</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cunungaceaster, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Chester-le-Street" style="text-align: left">Chester-le-Street</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Cuthbald-Medeshamstead"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cuthbald, Abbot of Medeshamstead, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg356" style="text-align: left">356</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Cuthbald-Cudwald"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cuthbald, or Cudwald, Abbot of Oundle, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg356" style="text-align: left">356</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Cuthbert-Lindisfarne"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cuthbert, St., Bishop of Lindisfarne, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxii" style="text-align: left">xxii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxix" style="text-align: left">xxix</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxviii" style="text-align: left">xxxviii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg004" style="text-align: left">4</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg161" style="text-align: left">161</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg168" style="text-align: left">168</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg192" style="text-align: left">192</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg244" style="text-align: left">244</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg331" style="text-align: left">331</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg389" style="text-align: left">389</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            history of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg288" style="text-align: left">288-295</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            at Farne, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg288" style="text-align: left">288</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            at Melrose, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg288" style="text-align: left">288</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg289" style="text-align: left">289</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            succeeds Boisil as Provost, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg289" style="text-align: left">289</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            at Ripon, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg194" style="text-align: left">194</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his consecration, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg285" style="text-align: left">285</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg288" style="text-align: left">288</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg292" style="text-align: left">292</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg293" style="text-align: left">293</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Bishop of Hexham, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg293" style="text-align: left">293</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            of Lindisfarne, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg293" style="text-align: left">293</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his friendship for Elfled, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg189" style="text-align: left">189</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            foretells Egfrid's defeat by the Picts, and death, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page408">[pg 408]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" style="text-align: left" id="Pg408"/>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg189" style="text-align: left">189</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg285" style="text-align: left">285</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg286" style="text-align: left">286</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his vision, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg288" style="text-align: left">288</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his spiritual powers, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg289" style="text-align: left">289</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his missionary journeys, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg289" style="text-align: left">289</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg290" style="text-align: left">290</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his hermitage on Farne Island, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg291" style="text-align: left">291</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg292" style="text-align: left">292</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg294" style="text-align: left">294</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            attends the Synod at Twyford, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg292" style="text-align: left">292</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his piety, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg293" style="text-align: left">293</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg297" style="text-align: left">297</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            at Carlisle, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg294" style="text-align: left">294</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            foretells his own death to Herebert, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg294" style="text-align: left">294</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg295" style="text-align: left">295</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg295" style="text-align: left">295</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            buried at Lindisfarne, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg295" style="text-align: left">295</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg302" style="text-align: left">302</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his body preserved from corruption, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg295" style="text-align: left">295</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg296" style="text-align: left">296</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg297" style="text-align: left">297</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg300" style="text-align: left">300</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            removal of his relics, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg295" style="text-align: left">295</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg302" style="text-align: left">302</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            miracles, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg291" style="text-align: left">291</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg292" style="text-align: left">292</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg297" style="text-align: left">297</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg298" style="text-align: left">298</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg299" style="text-align: left">299</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg300" style="text-align: left">300</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Anonymous Life of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxii" style="text-align: left">xxii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg285" style="text-align: left">285</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Bede's Life of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Bede" style="text-align: left">Bede</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Cuthbert-Archbishop"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cuthbert, Archbishop of Canterbury after Nothelm, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg090" style="text-align: left">90</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg391" style="text-align: left">391</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Cuthbert-Wearmouth"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cuthbert, Abbot of Wearmouth and Jarrow, pupil of Bede, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxix" style="text-align: left">xxxix</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxl" style="text-align: left">xl</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his letter to Cuthwin describing Bede's death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxxiv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxv" style="text-align: left">xxxv</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxix" style="text-align: left">xxxix</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxl" style="text-align: left">xl-xliii</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Cuthred"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cuthred, King of Wessex, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg391" style="text-align: left">391</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg392" style="text-align: left">392</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cuthwin, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxxiv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxl" style="text-align: left">xl</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">et
            seq.</span></span>
</div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cuthwine, father of Coenred, King of Northumbria, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg375" style="text-align: left">375</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Cycles"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cycles, Paschal, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg084" style="text-align: left">84</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg368" style="text-align: left">368</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg369" style="text-align: left">369</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg370" style="text-align: left">370</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg374" style="text-align: left">374</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Cyneburg"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cyneburg, St., daughter of Penda, wife of Alchfrid, Abbess of
            Caistor, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg180" style="text-align: left">180</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cyneburga, daughter of Cynegils, wife of Oswald, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg148" style="text-align: left">148</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cyneburgacaster, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Caistor" style="text-align: left">Caistor</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Cynegils"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cynegils, King of Wessex, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg103" style="text-align: left">103</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg147" style="text-align: left">147</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            baptized with all his people, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg148" style="text-align: left">148</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his daughter married to Oswald, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg148" style="text-align: left">148</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            divides the West Saxon diocese, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg150" style="text-align: left">150</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg149" style="text-align: left">149</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Cynibert-Lindsey"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cynibert, Bishop of Lindsey or Sidnacester, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg004" style="text-align: left">4</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg243" style="text-align: left">243</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg244" style="text-align: left">244</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg379" style="text-align: left">379</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg380" style="text-align: left">380</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg390" style="text-align: left">390</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Cynibert-Redbridge"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cynibert, Abbot of Redbridge, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg253" style="text-align: left">253</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cynibill, brother of Cedd, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg186" style="text-align: left">186</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg187" style="text-align: left">187</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cynifrid, surgeon to Ethelthryth, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg262" style="text-align: left">262</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cynimund, a priest, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg167" style="text-align: left">167</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Cyniwulf"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cyniwulf, King of Wessex, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg392" style="text-align: left">392</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cynwise, wife of Penda, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg188" style="text-align: left">188</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg227" style="text-align: left">227</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Cyril"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cyril, Archbishop of Alexandria, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg255" style="text-align: left">255</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg256" style="text-align: left">256</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg369" style="text-align: left">369</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Cyrus, in Syria, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Theodoret" style="text-align: left">Theodoret</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Dacre, or Dacore, The Monastery of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg299" style="text-align: left">299</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            a monk of, miraculously cured of a tumour, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg299" style="text-align: left">299</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg300" style="text-align: left">300</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Dacre, Abbot of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Suidbert-Abbot" style="text-align: left">Suidbert</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Thruidred" style="text-align: left">Thruidred</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Dacre, The River, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg299" style="text-align: left">299</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Dagan"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Dagan, Bishop of Inverdaeile, or Ennereilly, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg092" style="text-align: left">92</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Dagobert-I"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Dagobert I, King of the Franks, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg132" style="text-align: left">132</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Dagobert-II"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Dagobert II, King of Austrasia, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg351" style="text-align: left">351</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Dal, Signification of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg008" style="text-align: left">8</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Dalfinus, Archbishop of Lyons, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Annemundus" style="text-align: left">Annemundus</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Dalfinus-Count"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Dalfinus, Count of Lyons, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg194" style="text-align: left">194</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg348" style="text-align: left">348</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Dalriada, the Dalreudini or Dalriadic Scots, history, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxiv</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg008" style="text-align: left">8</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg073" style="text-align: left">73</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg142" style="text-align: left">142</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg286" style="text-align: left">286</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg392" style="text-align: left">392</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Dalriadic Scots, King of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Conall" style="text-align: left">Conall</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Dalston, near Carlisle, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg073" style="text-align: left">73</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Damascus, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg338" style="text-align: left">338</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Damian"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Damian, or Damianus, Bishop of Rochester after Ithamar, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg179" style="text-align: left">179</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg216" style="text-align: left">216</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg245" style="text-align: left">245</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            account of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg179" style="text-align: left">179</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg206" style="text-align: left">206</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg218" style="text-align: left">218</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Danes, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg030" style="text-align: left">30</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg317" style="text-align: left">317</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            their invasions of England, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg122" style="text-align: left">122</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg161" style="text-align: left">161</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg231" style="text-align: left">231</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg295" style="text-align: left">295</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg303" style="text-align: left">303</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Daniel"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Daniel, Bishop of Winchester, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxx" style="text-align: left">xxx</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg003" style="text-align: left">3</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg148" style="text-align: left">148</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg253" style="text-align: left">253</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg344" style="text-align: left">344</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg345" style="text-align: left">345</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg379" style="text-align: left">379</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg380" style="text-align: left">380</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Danube, The River, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg317" style="text-align: left">317</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Darling, Grace, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg168" style="text-align: left">168</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            David, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg061" style="text-align: left">61</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg338" style="text-align: left">338</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg341" style="text-align: left">341</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Dawstane Rig, Liddesdale, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg073" style="text-align: left">73</a> n.
          </div>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page409">[pg 409]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg409"/>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Dearmach"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Dearmach, Durrow, or Field of Oaks, Monastery of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg142" style="text-align: left">142</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Decius, Emperor, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg265" style="text-align: left">265</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg388" style="text-align: left">388</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Deda"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Deda, Abbot of Partney, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg123" style="text-align: left">123</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Degsastan, or Degsa Stone, Battle of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg073" style="text-align: left">73</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg074" style="text-align: left">74</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg383" style="text-align: left">383</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“De
            Ingratis,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Prosper" style="text-align: left">Prosper</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Deira, History of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg082" style="text-align: left">82</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg083" style="text-align: left">83</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg120" style="text-align: left">120</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg134" style="text-align: left">134</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg147" style="text-align: left">147</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg190" style="text-align: left">190</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg270" style="text-align: left">270</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg383" style="text-align: left">383</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            diocese of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg243" style="text-align: left">243</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Gregory's pun on the name, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg082" style="text-align: left">82</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Deira, King of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Aelli-Deira" style="text-align: left">Aelli</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ethelfrid" style="text-align: left">Ethelfrid</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ethelric" style="text-align: left">Ethelric</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Oidilwald" style="text-align: left">Oidilwald</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Osric-Deira" style="text-align: left">Osric</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Oswin-Deira" style="text-align: left">Oswin</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Yffi-Deira" style="text-align: left">Yffi</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Deira, Sub-king of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Aelfwine" style="text-align: left">Aelfwine</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Egfrid" style="text-align: left">Egfrid</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Deira, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Bosa" style="text-align: left">Bosa</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“De Locis
            Sanctis,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Adamnan-Iona" style="text-align: left">Adamnan</a> and <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Bede" style="text-align: left">Bede</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“De Mensura
            Orbis Terrae,”</span> the author of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg246" style="text-align: left">246</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Denisesburna, or The Brook of Denis, Battle of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg135" style="text-align: left">135</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg136" style="text-align: left">136</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Deogratias, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg179" style="text-align: left">179</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Derbyshire, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg181" style="text-align: left">181</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Derwent, the River (Cumberland), <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg294" style="text-align: left">294</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Derwent, the River (Durham), <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg260" style="text-align: left">260</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Derwent, the River (Yorkshire), <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg104" style="text-align: left">104</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg118" style="text-align: left">118</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg350" style="text-align: left">350</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Derwentwater, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg294" style="text-align: left">294</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Deusdedit, Pope, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg098" style="text-align: left">98</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg100" style="text-align: left">100</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg179" style="text-align: left">179</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Deusdedit-Archbishop"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Deusdedit, or Frithonas, Archbishop of Canterbury, after
            Honorius, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg178" style="text-align: left">178</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg179" style="text-align: left">179</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg208" style="text-align: left">208</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg351" style="text-align: left">351</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg179" style="text-align: left">179</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg206" style="text-align: left">206</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg207" style="text-align: left">207</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg213" style="text-align: left">213</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg217" style="text-align: left">217</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Deusdedit, The name of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg179" style="text-align: left">179</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Deuteronomy, quoted, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg055" style="text-align: left">55</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg279" style="text-align: left">279</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Devils, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg328" style="text-align: left">328</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg332" style="text-align: left">332</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg333" style="text-align: left">333</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg334" style="text-align: left">334</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg335" style="text-align: left">335</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg336" style="text-align: left">336</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Devil's Water, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg135" style="text-align: left">135</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Devon and Cornwall, Kingdom of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Dumnonia" style="text-align: left">Dumnonia</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Diarmaid, Irish King, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg140" style="text-align: left">140</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Dictionary of
            Christian Antiquities,”</span> referred to, vi, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg227" style="text-align: left">227</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Dictionary of
            Christian Biography,”</span> referred to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgvi" style="text-align: left">vi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg019" style="text-align: left">19</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg049" style="text-align: left">49</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg387" style="text-align: left">387</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Dicul, an Irish monk of Bosham, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg246" style="text-align: left">246</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Dicull, one of Fursa's priests, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg177" style="text-align: left">177</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Dima"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Dima, Bishop of Connor, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg129" style="text-align: left">129</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Dinnaus, probably Dima, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg128" style="text-align: left">128</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Dinoot"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Dinoot, Donatus, Dunawd or Dunod, Abbot of Bangor, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg086" style="text-align: left">86</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Diocletian, Emperor, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg012" style="text-align: left">12</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg013" style="text-align: left">13</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg014" style="text-align: left">14</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg019" style="text-align: left">19</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg265" style="text-align: left">265</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Dionysius Exiguus, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg228" style="text-align: left">228</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg369" style="text-align: left">369</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Discipline, Augustine's Questions and Gregory's Answers on,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg049" style="text-align: left">49-64</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Diuma"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Diuma, Bishop of Lindsey, Mercia, and Mid-Anglia, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvii" style="text-align: left">xxvii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg181" style="text-align: left">181</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg190" style="text-align: left">190</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            accompanies Peada into Mid-Anglia, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg180" style="text-align: left">180</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg181" style="text-align: left">181</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg181" style="text-align: left">181</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg190" style="text-align: left">190</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            burial, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg190" style="text-align: left">190</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg191" style="text-align: left">191</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Divorce, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg230" style="text-align: left">230</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg238" style="text-align: left">238</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg239" style="text-align: left">239</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Dolphins in Britain, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg005" style="text-align: left">5</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Domesday-Book, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg268" style="text-align: left">268</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Dommoc, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Dunwich" style="text-align: left">Dunwich</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Don, The River, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg189" style="text-align: left">189</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Donafeld, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Campodonum" style="text-align: left">Campodonum</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Donatus, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Dinoot" style="text-align: left">Dinoot</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Doncaster (perhaps Campodonum), <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg120" style="text-align: left">120</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg131" style="text-align: left">131</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Dooms, of Edric, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg287" style="text-align: left">287</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            of Ethelbert, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg095" style="text-align: left">95</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            of Hlothere, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg287" style="text-align: left">287</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            of Ini, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg231" style="text-align: left">231</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg251" style="text-align: left">251</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Dorchester (Oxfordshire), See at, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg148" style="text-align: left">148</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg272" style="text-align: left">272</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg273" style="text-align: left">273</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Dorchester, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Aetla" style="text-align: left">Aetla</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Agilbert" style="text-align: left">Agilbert</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Birinus" style="text-align: left">Birinus</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Dorsetshire, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg343" style="text-align: left">343</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Dorubrevis, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Rochester" style="text-align: left">Rochester</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Doruvernis, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Canterbury" style="text-align: left">Canterbury</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Double Procession of the Holy Spirit, Doctrine of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg256" style="text-align: left">256</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Doulting, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg343" style="text-align: left">343</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Dreams, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Visions" style="text-align: left">Visions</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Driffield, or Field of Deira, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg342" style="text-align: left">342</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Drought, An excessive, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg391" style="text-align: left">391</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Drythelm, a Northumbrian, his visions of Death, Hell and
            Judgement, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxx" style="text-align: left">xxx</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg325" style="text-align: left">325-331</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            retires into the monastery of Melrose, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg326" style="text-align: left">326</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg331" style="text-align: left">331</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg332" style="text-align: left">332</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ducange, editorial references to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg077" style="text-align: left">77</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg090" style="text-align: left">90</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg135" style="text-align: left">135</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg266" style="text-align: left">266</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg305" style="text-align: left">305</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg340" style="text-align: left">340</a> n.
          </div>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page410">[pg 410]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg410"/>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Dudden"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Dudden, F. Homes, his <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Gregory the Great,”</span> editorial
            references to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg075" style="text-align: left">75</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg081" style="text-align: left">81</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg133" style="text-align: left">133</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Dugdale"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Dugdale's <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Monasticon,”</span> editorial references to,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg018" style="text-align: left">18</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg275" style="text-align: left">275</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Dumbarton"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Dumbarton, Alcluith, or Dúnbrettan, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg009" style="text-align: left">9</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg024" style="text-align: left">24</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg025" style="text-align: left">25</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Dumnonia"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Dumnonia, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg344" style="text-align: left">344</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Dumnonia, King of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Geraint-King" style="text-align: left">Geraint</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Dunawd, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Dinoot" style="text-align: left">Dinoot</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Dunbar, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg352" style="text-align: left">352</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Dúnbrettan, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Dumbarton" style="text-align: left">Dumbarton</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Dunchad, Abbot of Iona, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg376" style="text-align: left">376</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Dunnechtan, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Nechtansmere" style="text-align: left">Nechtansmere</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Dunnichen, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg285" style="text-align: left">285</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Dunod, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Dinoot" style="text-align: left">Dinoot</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Dunwich"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Dunwich, or Dommoc, Diocese of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg122" style="text-align: left">122</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg172" style="text-align: left">172</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Dunwich, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Aecci" style="text-align: left">Aecci</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Aldbert" style="text-align: left">Aldbert</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Bisi" style="text-align: left">Bisi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Boniface-Bertgils" style="text-align: left">Boniface</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Durham, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxl" style="text-align: left">xl</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg161" style="text-align: left">161</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg190" style="text-align: left">190</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg204" style="text-align: left">204</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg288" style="text-align: left">288</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg302" style="text-align: left">302</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Cathedral, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg295" style="text-align: left">295</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Durham, Reginald of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Reginald" style="text-align: left">Reginald</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Durrow, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Dearmach" style="text-align: left">Dearmach</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Dysentery, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg393" style="text-align: left">393</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Eabae, daughter of Eanfrid, wife of Ethelwalch, baptized,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg246" style="text-align: left">246</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Eadbald"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Eadbald, King of Kent, son of Ethelbert, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxiv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxvi</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg095" style="text-align: left">95</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg099" style="text-align: left">99</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg127" style="text-align: left">127</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg348" style="text-align: left">348</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his wickedness, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg095" style="text-align: left">95</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            marries his stepmother, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg095" style="text-align: left">95</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg097" style="text-align: left">97</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            gives her up, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg097" style="text-align: left">97</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            converted by Laurentius, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg097" style="text-align: left">97</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg098" style="text-align: left">98</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg101" style="text-align: left">101</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg105" style="text-align: left">105</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg107" style="text-align: left">107</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg110" style="text-align: left">110</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            recalls Mellitus and Justus, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg098" style="text-align: left">98</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            builds the Church of the Mother of God, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg098" style="text-align: left">98</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his letters to Pope Boniface, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg101" style="text-align: left">101</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            gives his sister in marriage to Edwin, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg102" style="text-align: left">102</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg103" style="text-align: left">103</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            welcomes Paulinus back to Kent, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg132" style="text-align: left">132</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg151" style="text-align: left">151</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg384" style="text-align: left">384</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Eadbert-Kent"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Eadbert, King of Kent, son of Wictred, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg377" style="text-align: left">377</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Eadbert-Northumbria"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Eadbert, King of Northumbria after Ceolwulf, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg391" style="text-align: left">391</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg392" style="text-align: left">392</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg393" style="text-align: left">393</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Eadbert-Lindisfarne"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Eadbert, Bishop of Lindisfarne, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg192" style="text-align: left">192</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg296" style="text-align: left">296</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg297" style="text-align: left">297</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg353" style="text-align: left">353</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            illness and death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg297" style="text-align: left">297</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            buried with Cuthbert at Lindisfarne, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg297" style="text-align: left">297</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg302" style="text-align: left">302</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            posthumous miracles, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg297" style="text-align: left">297</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg298" style="text-align: left">298</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Eadbert-Selsey"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Eadbert, Abbot of Selsey, afterwards Bishop of Selsey, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg345" style="text-align: left">345</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Eadbert, (unknown), slain, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg391" style="text-align: left">391</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Eadbert, Mercian Chief, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg191" style="text-align: left">191</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg192" style="text-align: left">192</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Eadfrid-Lindisfarne"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Eadfrid, Bishop of Lindisfarne, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg331" style="text-align: left">331</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Eadfrid, son of Edwin, baptized, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg119" style="text-align: left">119</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            killed by Penda, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg131" style="text-align: left">131</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Eadgyth, a nun of Barking, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg234" style="text-align: left">234</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Eadhaed"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Eadhaed, Bishop of Lindsey, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg207" style="text-align: left">207</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg243" style="text-align: left">243</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            translated to Ripon, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg244" style="text-align: left">244</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg385" style="text-align: left">385</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Eadwulf"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Eadwulf, usurps the throne of Northumbria, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg342" style="text-align: left">342</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg391" style="text-align: left">391</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            besieges Bamborough, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg385" style="text-align: left">385</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Eafa, Mercian Chief, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg191" style="text-align: left">191</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg192" style="text-align: left">192</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Eanfled"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Eanfled, daughter of Edwin, wife of Oswy, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxv" style="text-align: left">xxv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg165" style="text-align: left">165</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg167" style="text-align: left">167</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg189" style="text-align: left">189</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg191" style="text-align: left">191</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            her birth, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg104" style="text-align: left">104</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            baptism, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg104" style="text-align: left">104</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg384" style="text-align: left">384</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            taken by her mother and Paulinus into Kent, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxv" style="text-align: left">xxv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg132" style="text-align: left">132</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg167" style="text-align: left">167</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            observes the Catholic Easter, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg193" style="text-align: left">193</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            receives a cross from Pope Vitalian, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg211" style="text-align: left">211</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            befriends Wilfrid, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg347" style="text-align: left">347</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg348" style="text-align: left">348</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            joint Abbess of Whitby with her daughter Elfled, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg189" style="text-align: left">189</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg286" style="text-align: left">286</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg306" style="text-align: left">306</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            buried at Whitby, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg190" style="text-align: left">190</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            her relatives, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg348" style="text-align: left">348</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Eanfrid-Bernicia"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Eanfrid, King of Bernicia, son of Ethelfrid, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg134" style="text-align: left">134</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Eanfrid-Hwiccas"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Eanfrid, King of the Hwiccas, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg246" style="text-align: left">246</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Eanred, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg392" style="text-align: left">392</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Eappa"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Eappa, a priest of Wilfrid's, afterwards Abbot of Selsey,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg245" style="text-align: left">245</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg248" style="text-align: left">248</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg249" style="text-align: left">249</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg250" style="text-align: left">250</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Earconbert"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Earconbert, King of Kent, son of Eadbald, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg151" style="text-align: left">151</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg261" style="text-align: left">261</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            suppresses idolatry, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg151" style="text-align: left">151</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            sends Wilfrid and Benedict Biscop to Rome, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg348" style="text-align: left">348</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg213" style="text-align: left">213</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg384" style="text-align: left">384</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Earcongota, daughter of Earconbert and granddaughter of Anna,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg149" style="text-align: left">149</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg151" style="text-align: left">151</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg152" style="text-align: left">152</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg153" style="text-align: left">153</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Earconwald"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Earconwald, St., Bishop of London, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxviii" style="text-align: left">xxviii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg231" style="text-align: left">231</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg232" style="text-align: left">232</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg239" style="text-align: left">239</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Earpwald"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Earpwald, King of East Anglia, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page411">[pg 411]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" style="text-align: left" id="Pg411"/> son of Redwald,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxv" style="text-align: left">xxv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg171" style="text-align: left">171</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            converted by Edwin, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxv" style="text-align: left">xxv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg120" style="text-align: left">120</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg121" style="text-align: left">121</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            slain by Ricbert, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg121" style="text-align: left">121</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            East Angles, The, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg030" style="text-align: left">30</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg045" style="text-align: left">45</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            East Anglia, History of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg003" style="text-align: left">3</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg112" style="text-align: left">112</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg177" style="text-align: left">177</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg220" style="text-align: left">220</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg271" style="text-align: left">271</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            establishment of Christianity in, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxv" style="text-align: left">xxv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg121" style="text-align: left">121</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg122" style="text-align: left">122</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            diocese of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxviii" style="text-align: left">xxviii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg231" style="text-align: left">231</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg379" style="text-align: left">379</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg380" style="text-align: left">380</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            East Anglia, King of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Aldwulf-King" style="text-align: left">Aldwulf</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Anna" style="text-align: left">Anna</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Earpwald" style="text-align: left">Earpwald</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ecgric" style="text-align: left">Ecgric</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ethelhere" style="text-align: left">Ethelhere</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ethelwald-Anglia" style="text-align: left">Ethelwald</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Redwald" style="text-align: left">Redwald</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Sigbert-Anglia" style="text-align: left">Sigbert</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Tytilus" style="text-align: left">Tytilus</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Uuffa" style="text-align: left">Uuffa</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            East Anglia, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Bisi" style="text-align: left">Bisi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Boniface-Bertgils" style="text-align: left">Boniface</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Thomas-Anglia" style="text-align: left">Thomas</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Easter-Controversy"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Easter Controversy, The, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxiv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxv" style="text-align: left">xxv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxviii" style="text-align: left">xxviii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxx" style="text-align: left">xxx</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxi" style="text-align: left">xxxi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxviii" style="text-align: left">xxxviii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxix" style="text-align: left">xxxix</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg084" style="text-align: left">84</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg085" style="text-align: left">85</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg087" style="text-align: left">87</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg091" style="text-align: left">91</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg128" style="text-align: left">128</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg129" style="text-align: left">129</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg138" style="text-align: left">138</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg139" style="text-align: left">139</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg143" style="text-align: left">143</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg170" style="text-align: left">170</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg171" style="text-align: left">171</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg192" style="text-align: left">192-201</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg210" style="text-align: left">210</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg216" style="text-align: left">216</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg228" style="text-align: left">228</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg336" style="text-align: left">336</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg337" style="text-align: left">337</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg344" style="text-align: left">344</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg350" style="text-align: left">350</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg359" style="text-align: left">359-370</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg374" style="text-align: left">374-376</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg381" style="text-align: left">381</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg386" style="text-align: left">386</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Easter kept twice in one year, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg193" style="text-align: left">193</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Eastern Church, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Greek" style="text-align: left">Greek</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            East Lothian, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg325" style="text-align: left">325</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            East Saxons, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg030" style="text-align: left">30</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg045" style="text-align: left">45</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg191" style="text-align: left">191</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            diocese of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-London" style="text-align: left">London</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            province of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Essex" style="text-align: left">Essex</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Eata"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Eata, Abbot of Melrose, afterwards Bishop of Hexham, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg194" style="text-align: left">194</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg243" style="text-align: left">243</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg244" style="text-align: left">244</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg288" style="text-align: left">288</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg290" style="text-align: left">290</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg318" style="text-align: left">318</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg385" style="text-align: left">385</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            ordained at York in Wilfrid's place, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg244" style="text-align: left">244</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Bishop of Lindisfarne, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg202" style="text-align: left">202</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg244" style="text-align: left">244</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg288" style="text-align: left">288</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg302" style="text-align: left">302</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Eata Glinmaur, father of Eadbert of Northumbria, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg391" style="text-align: left">391</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ebbsfleet, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg045" style="text-align: left">45</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ebchester, Monastery of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg260" style="text-align: left">260</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Ebroin"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ebroin, Mayor of the Palace to Clothaire III, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg192" style="text-align: left">192</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg349" style="text-align: left">349</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            plots against Wilfrid, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg192" style="text-align: left">192</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg351" style="text-align: left">351</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            detains Hadrian and Theodore, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg215" style="text-align: left">215</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg216" style="text-align: left">216</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            murdered, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg215" style="text-align: left">215</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Ecclesiastes,”</span> quoted, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg220" style="text-align: left">220</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ecclesiastical Arithmetic, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg217" style="text-align: left">217</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Ecclesiastical-History"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Ecclesiastical
            History,”</span> Bede's, MSS. of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxix" style="text-align: left">xix</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg277" style="text-align: left">277</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            sources of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxi" style="text-align: left">xxi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxii" style="text-align: left">xxii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg005" style="text-align: left">5</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            editions of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxix" style="text-align: left">xix</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxx" style="text-align: left">xx</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            translations of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxx" style="text-align: left">xx</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxi" style="text-align: left">xxi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg249" style="text-align: left">249</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg321" style="text-align: left">321</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            date of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg379" style="text-align: left">379</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Bede's own account of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg386" style="text-align: left">386</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            and <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">passim</span></span>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Ecgric"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ecgric, King of East Anglia, after Sigbert, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg172" style="text-align: left">172</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Eclanum, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Julianus" style="text-align: left">Julianus</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Eclipses of the Moon, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg390" style="text-align: left">390</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg392" style="text-align: left">392</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            of the Sun, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg203" style="text-align: left">203</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg213" style="text-align: left">213</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg383" style="text-align: left">383</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg384" style="text-align: left">384</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg390" style="text-align: left">390</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg392" style="text-align: left">392</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Eddi"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Eddi, or Eddius, surnamed Stephen, editorial references to, his
            <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Life of
            Wilfrid,”</span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg189" style="text-align: left">189</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg217" style="text-align: left">217</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg218" style="text-align: left">218</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg244" style="text-align: left">244</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg252" style="text-align: left">252</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg267" style="text-align: left">267</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg346" style="text-align: left">346</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg347" style="text-align: left">347</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg348" style="text-align: left">348</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg349" style="text-align: left">349</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg350" style="text-align: left">350</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg351" style="text-align: left">351</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg353" style="text-align: left">353</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            teaches the Northumbrians to sing in church, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg217" style="text-align: left">217</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Edessa, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ibas" style="text-align: left">Ibas</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Edgar"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Edgar, Bishop of Lindsey, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg243" style="text-align: left">243</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Edilhart"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Edilhart, King of Wessex, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg391" style="text-align: left">391</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Edinburgh (perhaps Urbs Iudeu), <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg023" style="text-align: left">23</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg189" style="text-align: left">189</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Edric, King of Kent, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg287" style="text-align: left">287</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Edwin"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Edwin, King of Deira, afterwards of Northumbria, 5th Bretwalda,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg109" style="text-align: left">109</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg127" style="text-align: left">127</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg147" style="text-align: left">147</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg164" style="text-align: left">164</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg243" style="text-align: left">243</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg348" style="text-align: left">348</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his early history, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxv" style="text-align: left">xxv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg112" style="text-align: left">112</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg115" style="text-align: left">115</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg130" style="text-align: left">130</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            marries Ethelberg of Kent, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxiv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg102" style="text-align: left">102</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg103" style="text-align: left">103</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            conquers the Mevanian Islands, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg094" style="text-align: left">94</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg102" style="text-align: left">102</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his dominion, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg102" style="text-align: left">102</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his vision, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg112" style="text-align: left">112</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg113" style="text-align: left">113</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg114" style="text-align: left">114</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg115" style="text-align: left">115</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his conversion and baptism, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxv" style="text-align: left">xxv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg102" style="text-align: left">102</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg105" style="text-align: left">105</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg110" style="text-align: left">110</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg111" style="text-align: left">111</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg115" style="text-align: left">115</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg116" style="text-align: left">116</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg118" style="text-align: left">118</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg131" style="text-align: left">131</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg270" style="text-align: left">270</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg271" style="text-align: left">271</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg384" style="text-align: left">384</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            allows his daughter to be baptized, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg104" style="text-align: left">104</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg384" style="text-align: left">384</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his children, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg104" style="text-align: left">104</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg119" style="text-align: left">119</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg132" style="text-align: left">132</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            receives letters from Pope Honorius, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg124" style="text-align: left">124</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg125" style="text-align: left">125</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            converts Earpwald, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxv" style="text-align: left">xxv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg120" style="text-align: left">120</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg121" style="text-align: left">121</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Eumer's attack on his life, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg103" style="text-align: left">103</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg104" style="text-align: left">104</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his war against the West Saxons, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg104" style="text-align: left">104</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg105" style="text-align: left">105</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            builds St. Peter's, York, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg118" style="text-align: left">118</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg119" style="text-align: left">119</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg131" style="text-align: left">131</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            bestows the see of York upon Paulinus, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg118" style="text-align: left">118</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            marries Quenburga, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg119" style="text-align: left">119</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his glorious reign, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg123" style="text-align: left">123</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg124" style="text-align: left">124</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg130" style="text-align: left">130</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Caedwalla rebels against him, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg130" style="text-align: left">130</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            defeated and killed at the battle of Hatfield, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page412">[pg 412]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" style="text-align: left" id="Pg412"/>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxv" style="text-align: left">xxv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg119" style="text-align: left">119</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg130" style="text-align: left">130</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg131" style="text-align: left">131</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg134" style="text-align: left">134</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg135" style="text-align: left">135</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg154" style="text-align: left">154</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg167" style="text-align: left">167</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg384" style="text-align: left">384</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            buried at Whitby, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg131" style="text-align: left">131</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg190" style="text-align: left">190</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his head laid in St. Gregory's Chapel in St. Peter's, York,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg131" style="text-align: left">131</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg190" style="text-align: left">190</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his Cross and Chalice preserved at Canterbury, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg132" style="text-align: left">132</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Edwin's Cliff, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg393" style="text-align: left">393</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Edwinspath, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ouestraefelda" style="text-align: left">Ouestraefelda</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Egbert-York"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Egbert, Bishop of York after Wilfrid II, afterwards Archbishop,
            pupil of Bede, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg273" style="text-align: left">273</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg342" style="text-align: left">342</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg390" style="text-align: left">390</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg391" style="text-align: left">391</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            founder of the School of York, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxxvi</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Bede's <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Epistola
            ad Ecgbertum”</span> addressed to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg390" style="text-align: left">390</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Bede visits, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxix" style="text-align: left">xxxix</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg393" style="text-align: left">393</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Egbert, English monk in Ireland, probably bishop, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxx" style="text-align: left">xxx</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxi" style="text-align: left">xxxi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg143" style="text-align: left">143</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg203" style="text-align: left">203</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg205" style="text-align: left">205</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg316" style="text-align: left">316</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            account of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg143" style="text-align: left">143</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            seized with the plague, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg204" style="text-align: left">204</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his vow and recovery, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg205" style="text-align: left">205</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his attempted mission to Frisland, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg161" style="text-align: left">161</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg316" style="text-align: left">316</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            dissuaded by a revelation, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg317" style="text-align: left">317</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg318" style="text-align: left">318</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            sends Wilbrord instead, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg320" style="text-align: left">320</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            saved from shipwreck, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg319" style="text-align: left">319</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his good example, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg205" style="text-align: left">205</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg206" style="text-align: left">206</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his account of Ceadda's death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg223" style="text-align: left">223</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg224" style="text-align: left">224</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            advises Egfrid against the war with the Scots, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg286" style="text-align: left">286</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his mission to the Columban monasteries, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg318" style="text-align: left">318</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg319" style="text-align: left">319</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg375" style="text-align: left">375</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg376" style="text-align: left">376</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg386" style="text-align: left">386</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, on Easter Day, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg205" style="text-align: left">205</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg376" style="text-align: left">376</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg377" style="text-align: left">377</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg378" style="text-align: left">378</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg386" style="text-align: left">386</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Egbert-King"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Egbert, King of Kent, after Earconbert, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvii" style="text-align: left">xxvii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg213" style="text-align: left">213</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg287" style="text-align: left">287</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg377" style="text-align: left">377</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            consults with Oswy on Church matters, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg208" style="text-align: left">208</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            sends Wighard to Rome, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg208" style="text-align: left">208</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg213" style="text-align: left">213</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            sends Raedfrid to meet Theodore, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg215" style="text-align: left">215</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg226" style="text-align: left">226</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg230" style="text-align: left">230</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg384" style="text-align: left">384</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Egfrid"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Egfrid, King of Northumbria, son of Oswy, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxviii" style="text-align: left">xxviii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxix" style="text-align: left">xxix</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg137" style="text-align: left">137</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg207" style="text-align: left">207</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg227" style="text-align: left">227</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg254" style="text-align: left">254</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg260" style="text-align: left">260</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg266" style="text-align: left">266</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg302" style="text-align: left">302</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg352" style="text-align: left">352</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg353" style="text-align: left">353</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            hostage with Queen Cynwise, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg188" style="text-align: left">188</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg189" style="text-align: left">189</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg227" style="text-align: left">227</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            defeats Wulfhere and annexes Lindsey, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg191" style="text-align: left">191</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg243" style="text-align: left">243</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg244" style="text-align: left">244</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his conquests, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg226" style="text-align: left">226</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            defeated by Ethelred at the battle of the Trent, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg267" style="text-align: left">267</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            reconciled to Ethelred by Theodore, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg267" style="text-align: left">267</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            gives Benedict Biscop land for the monasteries of Wearmouth and
            Jarrow, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxxiv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg258" style="text-align: left">258</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his dispute with Wilfrid, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg242" style="text-align: left">242</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg245" style="text-align: left">245</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg385" style="text-align: left">385</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            marries Ethelthryth, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg259" style="text-align: left">259</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his relations with her, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg259" style="text-align: left">259</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg260" style="text-align: left">260</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            appoints Cuthbert Bishop of Lindisfarne, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg288" style="text-align: left">288</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg293" style="text-align: left">293</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            at the Synod of Twyford, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg292" style="text-align: left">292</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            at the Synod of Hertford, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg384" style="text-align: left">384</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his death foretold by Cuthbert, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg189" style="text-align: left">189</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg285" style="text-align: left">285</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            sends an army to ravage Ireland, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg285" style="text-align: left">285</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his expedition against the Picts and Scots, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg244" style="text-align: left">244</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg285" style="text-align: left">285</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg286" style="text-align: left">286</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            defeated and killed at the battle of Nechtansmere, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg247" style="text-align: left">247</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg285" style="text-align: left">285</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg286" style="text-align: left">286</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg288" style="text-align: left">288</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg342" style="text-align: left">342</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg381" style="text-align: left">381</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg385" style="text-align: left">385</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            buried at Iona, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg285" style="text-align: left">285</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Egwin"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Egwin, St., Bishop of Worcester, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg380" style="text-align: left">380</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Egypt, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg067" style="text-align: left">67</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg361" style="text-align: left">361</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg362" style="text-align: left">362</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg363" style="text-align: left">363</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg368" style="text-align: left">368</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            churches of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg196" style="text-align: left">196</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Egyptians, their skill in calculation, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg366" style="text-align: left">366</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Elafius, British Chief, his son cured of his lameness by
            Germanus, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg039" style="text-align: left">39</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg040" style="text-align: left">40</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Elbe, The river, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg317" style="text-align: left">317</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Eleutherus, or Eleuther, Pope, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg012" style="text-align: left">12</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg382" style="text-align: left">382</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Elfled"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Elfled, daughter of Oswy, dedicated to religion by her father,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxiii" style="text-align: left">xxxiii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg188" style="text-align: left">188</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg189" style="text-align: left">189</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            account of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg189" style="text-align: left">189</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            trained at Whitby, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg190" style="text-align: left">190</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            enters the Monastery of Hartlepool, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg190" style="text-align: left">190</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            joint Abbess of Whitby with her mother, Eanfled, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg189" style="text-align: left">189</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg190" style="text-align: left">190</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg285" style="text-align: left">285</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg286" style="text-align: left">286</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg306" style="text-align: left">306</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            her friendship with Trumwine, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg286" style="text-align: left">286</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg287" style="text-align: left">287</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg190" style="text-align: left">190</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            buried at Whitby, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg190" style="text-align: left">190</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Elford-on-Trent, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg267" style="text-align: left">267</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Elfred the priest, carries Bede's bones to Durham, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxl" style="text-align: left">xl</a>.
          </div>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page413">[pg 413]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg413"/>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Elge, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ely" style="text-align: left">Ely</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Elizabeth, Queen, <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“The Ecclesiastical History,”</span>
            translated for her benefit, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxi" style="text-align: left">xxi</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ellmyn, Celtic name for the English, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg317" style="text-align: left">317</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Elmet Wood, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg120" style="text-align: left">120</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Elmham, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Badwin" style="text-align: left">Badwin</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Hadulac" style="text-align: left">Hadulac</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Ely"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ely, Isle of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg260" style="text-align: left">260</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg261" style="text-align: left">261</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg263" style="text-align: left">263</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Monastery of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg260" style="text-align: left">260</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg261" style="text-align: left">261</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg262" style="text-align: left">262</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            St. Audrey's Fair at, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg263" style="text-align: left">263</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ely, Abbess of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ermingild" style="text-align: left">Ermingild</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ethelthryth-St" style="text-align: left">Ethelthryth</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Sexburg-Anna" style="text-align: left">Sexburg</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Emme"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Emme, Emmo, or Haymo, Bishop of Sens, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg215" style="text-align: left">215</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ems, The, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg317" style="text-align: left">317</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            End of the World, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg071" style="text-align: left">71</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            English, The, come to Britain, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg383" style="text-align: left">383</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            idolatry among, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg067" style="text-align: left">67</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg070" style="text-align: left">70</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            called Garmans, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg317" style="text-align: left">317</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Saxons, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg317" style="text-align: left">317</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Ellmyn, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg317" style="text-align: left">317</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Church, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiii" style="text-align: left">xxiii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvii" style="text-align: left">xxvii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxix" style="text-align: left">xxix</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg053" style="text-align: left">53</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg065" style="text-align: left">65</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            language, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg006" style="text-align: left">6</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg045" style="text-align: left">45</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            religious poetry, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg277" style="text-align: left">277</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“English
            Historical Review, The,”</span> editorial reference to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg032" style="text-align: left">32</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Eni, father of Anna, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg172" style="text-align: left">172</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ennereilly, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Inver-Daeile" style="text-align: left">Inver Daeile</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Eolla"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Eolla, Bishop of Selsey, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg345" style="text-align: left">345</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Eormenburg, second wife of Egfrid, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg242" style="text-align: left">242</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg352" style="text-align: left">352</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            warned by Cuthbert of Egfrid's death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg285" style="text-align: left">285</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Ephesians,
            Epistle to the,”</span> quoted, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg110" style="text-align: left">110</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ephesus, Council of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg255" style="text-align: left">255</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Epigrams, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg389" style="text-align: left">389</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Epistola ad
            Ecgbertum,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Bede" style="text-align: left">Bede</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Epternach, Wilbrord's monastery at, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg324" style="text-align: left">324</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Equinox, the Vernal, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg084" style="text-align: left">84</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg366" style="text-align: left">366</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg388" style="text-align: left">388</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Ercinwald"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ercinwald, Mayor of the Palace to Clovis II, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg178" style="text-align: left">178</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg215" style="text-align: left">215</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg349" style="text-align: left">349</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Ermingild"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ermingild, daughter of Sexburg, and wife of Wulfhere, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg149" style="text-align: left">149</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg261" style="text-align: left">261</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Abbess of Ely and Sheppey, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg261" style="text-align: left">261</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Ermynge"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ermynge, or Ixning, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg266" style="text-align: left">266</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Erneshow, or Herneshaw, now St. John's Lee, Hexham, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg303" style="text-align: left">303</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ernianus, Irish priest, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg129" style="text-align: left">129</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Esi, Abbot, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg003" style="text-align: left">3</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Esquiline, The, Rome, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg257" style="text-align: left">257</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Essex"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Essex, History of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxiv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvii" style="text-align: left">xxvii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxx" style="text-align: left">xxx</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg003" style="text-align: left">3</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg010" style="text-align: left">10</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg089" style="text-align: left">89</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg150" style="text-align: left">150</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg182" style="text-align: left">182</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg183" style="text-align: left">183</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg212" style="text-align: left">212</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg245" style="text-align: left">245</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg380" style="text-align: left">380</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg383" style="text-align: left">383</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            diocese of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-London" style="text-align: left">London</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Essex, King of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Offa-Essex" style="text-align: left">Offa</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Saba" style="text-align: left">Sabert</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Sebbi" style="text-align: left">Sebbi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Sigbert-Good" style="text-align: left">Sigbert</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Sighard" style="text-align: left">Sighard</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Sighere" style="text-align: left">Sighere</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Suefred" style="text-align: left">Suefred</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Suidhelm" style="text-align: left">Suidhelm</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Estrefeld, Council of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ouestraefelda" style="text-align: left">Ouestraefelda</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Etaples"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Etaples, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg215" style="text-align: left">215</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Eternal punishment, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg051" style="text-align: left">51</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg053" style="text-align: left">53</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Ethelbald"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ethelbald, King of Mercia, son of Alweo, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg346" style="text-align: left">346</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg380" style="text-align: left">380</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg386" style="text-align: left">386</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            account of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg380" style="text-align: left">380</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            ravages Northumbria, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg391" style="text-align: left">391</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            murdered, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg392" style="text-align: left">392</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Ethelberg-Brige"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ethelberg, daughter of Anna, Abbess of Brige, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg149" style="text-align: left">149</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg151" style="text-align: left">151</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg152" style="text-align: left">152</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg153" style="text-align: left">153</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg232" style="text-align: left">232</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Ethelberg-Tata"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ethelberg, or Tata, daughter of Ethelbert of Kent, wife of Edwin
            of Northumbria, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxiv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg102" style="text-align: left">102</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg103" style="text-align: left">103</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg104" style="text-align: left">104</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg119" style="text-align: left">119</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg348" style="text-align: left">348</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            receives a letter and gifts from Pope Boniface, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg109" style="text-align: left">109</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg111" style="text-align: left">111</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            her piety, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg110" style="text-align: left">110</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            after Edwin's death, returns with her children and Paulinus into
            Kent, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxv" style="text-align: left">xxv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg131" style="text-align: left">131</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg132" style="text-align: left">132</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            sends Wusfrea and Yffi to King Dagobert, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg132" style="text-align: left">132</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Ethelbert"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ethelbert, King of Kent, third Bretwalda, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxiv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg045" style="text-align: left">45</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg083" style="text-align: left">83</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg089" style="text-align: left">89</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg094" style="text-align: left">94</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg102" style="text-align: left">102</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his wife Bertha, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg046" style="text-align: left">46</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            converted by St. Augustine, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg045" style="text-align: left">45</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg046" style="text-align: left">46</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg047" style="text-align: left">47</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg090" style="text-align: left">90</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg094" style="text-align: left">94</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            receives a letter and gift from Gregory, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg069" style="text-align: left">69</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            builds St. Paul's, London, and St. Andrew's, Rochester, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg089" style="text-align: left">89</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg163" style="text-align: left">163</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            endows the bishoprics of London, Rochester and Canterbury,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg089" style="text-align: left">89</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            receives a letter from Boniface, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg093" style="text-align: left">93</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            account of his reign, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg093" style="text-align: left">93</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg094" style="text-align: left">94</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“dooms,”</span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg094" style="text-align: left">94</a>;
          </div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page414">[pg 414]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg414"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxiv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg093" style="text-align: left">93</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg094" style="text-align: left">94</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg095" style="text-align: left">95</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg384" style="text-align: left">384</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            burial, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg094" style="text-align: left">94</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            genealogy, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg095" style="text-align: left">95</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his second wife marries his son Eadbald, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg095" style="text-align: left">95</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg097" style="text-align: left">97</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ethelbert, King of Kent, son of Wictred, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg377" style="text-align: left">377</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Ethelburg"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ethelburg, St., sister of Earconwald, Abbess of Barking, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxviii" style="text-align: left">xxviii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg232" style="text-align: left">232</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg233" style="text-align: left">233</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            her miracles, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg232" style="text-align: left">232</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg233" style="text-align: left">233</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg236" style="text-align: left">236</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg237" style="text-align: left">237</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg235" style="text-align: left">235</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg236" style="text-align: left">236</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg237" style="text-align: left">237</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            burial, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg236" style="text-align: left">236</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            her spirit appears to Tortgyth, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg237" style="text-align: left">237</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Life
            of,”</span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxii" style="text-align: left">xxii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg237" style="text-align: left">237</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Ethelfrid"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ethelfrid, King of Northumbria, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxiv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg112" style="text-align: left">112</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg134" style="text-align: left">134</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            defeats the Britons at Legacaestir, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxiv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg087" style="text-align: left">87</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg088" style="text-align: left">88</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            defeats the Scots at Degsastan, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxiv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg073" style="text-align: left">73</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg074" style="text-align: left">74</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his genealogy and reign, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg073" style="text-align: left">73</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg074" style="text-align: left">74</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his persecution of Edwin, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg112" style="text-align: left">112</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg113" style="text-align: left">113</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            killed in battle by Redwald, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg115" style="text-align: left">115</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his wives, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg147" style="text-align: left">147</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his sons, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg163" style="text-align: left">163</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Ethelhere"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ethelhere, King of East Anglia, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg121" style="text-align: left">121</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg185" style="text-align: left">185</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg260" style="text-align: left">260</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg271" style="text-align: left">271</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            occasions the war between Penda and Oswy, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg189" style="text-align: left">189</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            slain at the Winwaed, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg189" style="text-align: left">189</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ethelhild, Abbess, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg158" style="text-align: left">158</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ethelhun, son of Edwin, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg119" style="text-align: left">119</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ethelhun, brother of Ethelwin, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg204" style="text-align: left">204</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg205" style="text-align: left">205</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Ethelred"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ethelred, King of Mercia, son of Penda, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxix" style="text-align: left">xxix</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg254" style="text-align: left">254</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg268" style="text-align: left">268</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg332" style="text-align: left">332</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg346" style="text-align: left">346</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg352" style="text-align: left">352</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg353" style="text-align: left">353</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg385" style="text-align: left">385</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            account of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg241" style="text-align: left">241</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            defeats Egfrid at the battle of the Trent, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg267" style="text-align: left">267</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            reconciled to Egfrid by Theodore, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg267" style="text-align: left">267</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            recovers Lindsey, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg207" style="text-align: left">207</a> n. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg244" style="text-align: left">244</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg267" style="text-align: left">267</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            ravages Kent, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg241" style="text-align: left">241</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg242" style="text-align: left">242</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg385" style="text-align: left">385</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his veneration for Bardney Monastery, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg157" style="text-align: left">157</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            appoints Oftfor Bishop of Worcester, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg274" style="text-align: left">274</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            reconciled to Wilfrid, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg355" style="text-align: left">355</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg356" style="text-align: left">356</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            resigns his throne to Coinred, and becomes a monk, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg355" style="text-align: left">355</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg356" style="text-align: left">356</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Abbot of Bardney, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg355" style="text-align: left">355</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg356" style="text-align: left">356</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            reconciles Coinred to Wilfrid, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg356" style="text-align: left">356</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Ethelric"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ethelric, King of Northumbria, son of Ida, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg073" style="text-align: left">73</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg270" style="text-align: left">270</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Ethelthryth-St"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ethelthryth, St. (of Audrey), daughter of Anna, wife of Tondbert
            and of Egfrid, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxix" style="text-align: left">xxix</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg149" style="text-align: left">149</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg220" style="text-align: left">220</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg263" style="text-align: left">263</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg269" style="text-align: left">269</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            her history, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg266" style="text-align: left">266</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            her virginity, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg259" style="text-align: left">259</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg260" style="text-align: left">260</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg264" style="text-align: left">264</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg267" style="text-align: left">267</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            her virtues, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg260" style="text-align: left">260</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg261" style="text-align: left">261</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            her gift of prophecy, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg261" style="text-align: left">261</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            gives land for a church at Hexham, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg137" style="text-align: left">137</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            obtains a divorce and retires into the Monastery of Coldingham,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg260" style="text-align: left">260</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            founds the Monastery of Ely, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg260" style="text-align: left">260</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg263" style="text-align: left">263</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            dies of a tumour, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg261" style="text-align: left">261</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg262" style="text-align: left">262</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg263" style="text-align: left">263</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            her flesh preserved from corruption, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg260" style="text-align: left">260</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg262" style="text-align: left">262</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg266" style="text-align: left">266</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            her posthumous miracles, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg262" style="text-align: left">262</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg263" style="text-align: left">263</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            her bones translated by Sexburg, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg261" style="text-align: left">261</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg262" style="text-align: left">262</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg263" style="text-align: left">263</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Bede's hymn in her honour, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg264" style="text-align: left">264-267</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ethelthryth, daughter of Edwin, baptized, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg119" style="text-align: left">119</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Ethelwalch"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ethelwalch, King of the South Saxons, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg245" style="text-align: left">245</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg247" style="text-align: left">247</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg251" style="text-align: left">251</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Ethelwald-Deira"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ethelwald, or Oidilwald, sub-king of Deira, son of Oswald,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvii" style="text-align: left">xxvii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg185" style="text-align: left">185</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            rebels against his uncle Oswy and supports Penda, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg163" style="text-align: left">163</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg189" style="text-align: left">189</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            gives Cedd land for a monastery at Lastingham, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg185" style="text-align: left">185</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg186" style="text-align: left">186</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Ethelwald-Anglia"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ethelwald, King of East Anglia, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg185" style="text-align: left">185</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Ethelwald-Northumbria"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ethelwald, King of Northumbria after Oswulf, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg393" style="text-align: left">393</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Ethelwald-Melrose"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ethelwald, Abbot of Melrose and Bishop of Lindisfarne, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg331" style="text-align: left">331</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg379" style="text-align: left">379</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg381" style="text-align: left">381</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg391" style="text-align: left">391</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his gifts to Lindisfarne, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg331" style="text-align: left">331</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ethelwald, Hermit, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg301" style="text-align: left">301</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg302" style="text-align: left">302</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ethelward, of the Hwiccas, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg243" style="text-align: left">243</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Ethelwin"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ethelwin, Bishop of Lindsey, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg158" style="text-align: left">158</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg204" style="text-align: left">204</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg243" style="text-align: left">243</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ethelwulf, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg143" style="text-align: left">143</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ethilwin, Oswy's reeve, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg164" style="text-align: left">164</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Eucharist, The, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Communion" style="text-align: left">Communion</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Eucherius, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg340" style="text-align: left">340</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Eudoxius"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Eudoxius, heretic Bishop of Constantinople, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg255" style="text-align: left">255</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg256" style="text-align: left">256</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Eugenius I, Pope, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg349" style="text-align: left">349</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Eulalia, St., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg265" style="text-align: left">265</a>.
          </div>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page415">[pg 415]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg415"/>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Eumer, attempts to murder Edwin, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg103" style="text-align: left">103</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg104" style="text-align: left">104</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Euphemia, St., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg265" style="text-align: left">265</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Europe, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg005" style="text-align: left">5</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Eusebius-Pamphili"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Eusebius Pamphili, Bishop of Caesarea, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg369" style="text-align: left">369</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Eusebius, name in religion given to Huaetbert, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg389" style="text-align: left">389</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Eutropius, quoted, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxii" style="text-align: left">xxii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg019" style="text-align: left">19</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Eutyches, founder of Eutychianism, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg078" style="text-align: left">78</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg254" style="text-align: left">254</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg256" style="text-align: left">256</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Eutychius, heretic patriarch of Constantinople, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg078" style="text-align: left">78</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Eve, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg266" style="text-align: left">266</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Excommunication, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg184" style="text-align: left">184</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Excursus on
            Paschal Controversy,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Plummer" style="text-align: left">Plummer</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Exodus,”</span>
            quoted, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg361" style="text-align: left">361</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg362" style="text-align: left">362</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Exorcism of Evil Spirits, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg311" style="text-align: left">311</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Ezekiel,
            Commentary on,”</span> by Gregory, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg079" style="text-align: left">79</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Ezra,”</span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg387" style="text-align: left">387</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg388" style="text-align: left">388</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Fainéant, Roi, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Clothaire-III" style="text-align: left">Clothaire III</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Famines, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg026" style="text-align: left">26</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg027" style="text-align: left">27</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg028" style="text-align: left">28</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Fara"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Fara, or Burgundofara, foundress of the Monastery of Brige,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg151" style="text-align: left">151</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg215" style="text-align: left">215</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Faremoûtier-en-Brie, or Farae Monasterium in Brige, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Brige" style="text-align: left">Brige</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Farne"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Farne, Isle of, or House Island, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxix" style="text-align: left">xxix</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg168" style="text-align: left">168</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg288" style="text-align: left">288</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg295" style="text-align: left">295</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg301" style="text-align: left">301</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg302" style="text-align: left">302</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Faro"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Faro, or Burgundofarus, Bishop of Meaux, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg215" style="text-align: left">215</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Fasting, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg145" style="text-align: left">145</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg151" style="text-align: left">151</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg206" style="text-align: left">206</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg282" style="text-align: left">282</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg307" style="text-align: left">307</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Feliskirk, Yorkshire, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg121" style="text-align: left">121</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Felix, St., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg388" style="text-align: left">388</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Felix III, Pope, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg075" style="text-align: left">75</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Felix IV, Pope, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg075" style="text-align: left">75</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Felix, Bishop of Dunwich, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxv" style="text-align: left">xxv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg121" style="text-align: left">121</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg122" style="text-align: left">122</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg193" style="text-align: left">193</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his school, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg172" style="text-align: left">172</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg122" style="text-align: left">122</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg178" style="text-align: left">178</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Felixstowe, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg121" style="text-align: left">121</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Fen Country, The, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg179" style="text-align: left">179</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Fergus, father of Oengus, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg392" style="text-align: left">392</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Field-of-Oaks, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Dearmach" style="text-align: left">Dearmach</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Fina, mother of Aldfrid, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg287" style="text-align: left">287</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Finan"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Finan, Bishop of Lindisfarne, after Aidan, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg169" style="text-align: left">169</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg201" style="text-align: left">201</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg204" style="text-align: left">204</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            baptizes Peada, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg180" style="text-align: left">180</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            ordains Diuma, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg181" style="text-align: left">181</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            baptizes Sigbert, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg182" style="text-align: left">182</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            ordains Cedd, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg183" style="text-align: left">183</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            builds a church at Lindisfarne, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg192" style="text-align: left">192</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his controversy with Ronan on the Easter question, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg193" style="text-align: left">193</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg193" style="text-align: left">193</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Finchale, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg204" style="text-align: left">204</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Fire, future punishment by, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg175" style="text-align: left">175</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Fire of London, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg240" style="text-align: left">240</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Fish of Britain, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg005" style="text-align: left">5</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Fiskerton, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg123" style="text-align: left">123</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Flintshire, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg086" style="text-align: left">86</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Florence of Worcester, editorial references to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg191" style="text-align: left">191</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg218" style="text-align: left">218</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg231" style="text-align: left">231</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg241" style="text-align: left">241</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg244" style="text-align: left">244</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg272" style="text-align: left">272</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg273" style="text-align: left">273</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg274" style="text-align: left">274</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg301" style="text-align: left">301</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg377" style="text-align: left">377</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg380" style="text-align: left">380</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Foillan, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Fullan" style="text-align: left">Fullan</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Folcard, his Life of St. John of Beverley, editorial references
            to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg303" style="text-align: left">303</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg305" style="text-align: left">305</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Fontaines, Monastery of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg092" style="text-align: left">92</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Forfar, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg285" style="text-align: left">285</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg360" style="text-align: left">360</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Forth, the, or Sea of Giudan, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg023" style="text-align: left">23</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg024" style="text-align: left">24</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg142" style="text-align: left">142</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg285" style="text-align: left">285</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg286" style="text-align: left">286</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Forthere-Sherborne"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Forthere, Bishop of Sherborne after Aldhelm, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg344" style="text-align: left">344</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg345" style="text-align: left">345</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg379" style="text-align: left">379</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg380" style="text-align: left">380</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Forthhere, Edwin's thegn, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg104" style="text-align: left">104</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Fortunatus"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Fortunatus, Venantius, Bishop of Poitiers, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg014" style="text-align: left">14</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg265" style="text-align: left">265</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Praise of
            Virgins”</span> quoted, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg015" style="text-align: left">15</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Fosite, the god, son of Balder, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg323" style="text-align: left">323</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Fosse, monastery of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg177" style="text-align: left">177</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Fosse, Abbot of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ultan" style="text-align: left">Ultan</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            France, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg005" style="text-align: left">5</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Franks, the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg013" style="text-align: left">13</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg022" style="text-align: left">22</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg092" style="text-align: left">92</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            their language, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg045" style="text-align: left">45</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Church of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg051" style="text-align: left">51</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg054" style="text-align: left">54</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg055" style="text-align: left">55</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            and <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Gaul" style="text-align: left">Gaul</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Franks, King of the, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Carloman" style="text-align: left">Carloman</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Charles" style="text-align: left">Charles Martel</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Charibert" style="text-align: left">Charibert</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Childebert" style="text-align: left">Childebert</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Chilperic" style="text-align: left">Chilperic</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Clothaire-III" style="text-align: left">Clothaire III</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Clovis-I" style="text-align: left">Clovis</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Dagobert-I" style="text-align: left">Dagobert</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Pippin-Short" style="text-align: left">Pippin</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Theodebert" style="text-align: left">Theodebert</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Theoderic" style="text-align: left">Theoderic</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Franks, Duke of the, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Pippin-Heristal" style="text-align: left">Pippin of Heristal</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Freeman"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Freeman's <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Norman Conquest,”</span> editorial references
            to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg032" style="text-align: left">32</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg246" style="text-align: left">246</a> n.
          </div>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page416">[pg 416]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg416"/>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Frigyth"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Frigyth, Prioress of Hackness, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg276" style="text-align: left">276</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Frisia, or Frisland, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg317" style="text-align: left">317</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg353" style="text-align: left">353</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Wictbert's mission to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg319" style="text-align: left">319</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            conquered by Pippin, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg320" style="text-align: left">320</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Wilbrord's mission to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg320" style="text-align: left">320</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Wilfrid's mission in, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg351" style="text-align: left">351</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Frisland, Archbishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Wilbrord" style="text-align: left">Wilbrord</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Frisland, King of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Aldgils" style="text-align: left">Aldgils</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Frisland, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Suidbert-Abbot" style="text-align: left">Suidbert</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Frithbert"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Frithbert, Bishop of Hexham, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg391" style="text-align: left">391</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg393" style="text-align: left">393</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Frithonas, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Deusdedit-Archbishop" style="text-align: left">Deusdedit</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Frithwald"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Frithwald, Bishop of Whitern, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg391" style="text-align: left">391</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Fullan"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Fullan, or Foillan, brother of Fursa, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg177" style="text-align: left">177</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Fuller, his story about Bede's epitaph, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxxiv</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Fünen, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg317" style="text-align: left">317</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Fursa"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Fursa, St., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg173" style="text-align: left">173-178</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Fursa, Life of
            St.,”</span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxii" style="text-align: left">xxii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg173" style="text-align: left">173</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg174" style="text-align: left">174</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg178" style="text-align: left">178</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Gaels, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Goidels" style="text-align: left">Goidels</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Galatians,
            Epistle to the,”</span> quoted, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg371" style="text-align: left">371</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Gallican
            Martyrology,”</span> editorial reference to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg322" style="text-align: left">322</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Galloway, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg141" style="text-align: left">141</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Garmans, English so-called by the Britons, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg317" style="text-align: left">317</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Gateshead-on-Tyne"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Gateshead-on-Tyne, or At-the-Goat's Head, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg180" style="text-align: left">180</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Gateshead, Abbot of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Utta" style="text-align: left">Utta</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Gaul"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Gaul, history of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxi" style="text-align: left">xxxi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg005" style="text-align: left">5</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg007" style="text-align: left">7</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg010" style="text-align: left">10</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg014" style="text-align: left">14</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg019" style="text-align: left">19</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg020" style="text-align: left">20</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg022" style="text-align: left">22</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg033" style="text-align: left">33</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg044" style="text-align: left">44</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg055" style="text-align: left">55</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg092" style="text-align: left">92</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg096" style="text-align: left">96</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg098" style="text-align: left">98</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg150" style="text-align: left">150</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg178" style="text-align: left">178</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg214" style="text-align: left">214</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg378" style="text-align: left">378</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg382" style="text-align: left">382</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Church of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg051" style="text-align: left">51</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg054" style="text-align: left">54</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg055" style="text-align: left">55</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg196" style="text-align: left">196</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            schools of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg121" style="text-align: left">121</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg172" style="text-align: left">172</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Gaul, Archbishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Annemundus" style="text-align: left">Annemundus</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Godwin" style="text-align: left">Godwin</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Gaul, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Arculf" style="text-align: left">Arculf</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Gauls, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg009" style="text-align: left">9</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Gebmund"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Gebmund, Bishop of Rochester, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg241" style="text-align: left">241</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg242" style="text-align: left">242</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg316" style="text-align: left">316</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Genesis, quoted, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg073" style="text-align: left">73</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg110" style="text-align: left">110</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg366" style="text-align: left">366</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg370" style="text-align: left">370</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Genlade, the river, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg315" style="text-align: left">315</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Genoa, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Asterius-Genoa" style="text-align: left">Asterius</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Geraint-Gerontius"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Geraint, or Gerontius, Count, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg022" style="text-align: left">22</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Geraint-King"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Geraint, or Gerontius, King of Dumnonia, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg336" style="text-align: left">336</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg344" style="text-align: left">344</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Germans, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg009" style="text-align: left">9</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg022" style="text-align: left">22</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Germanus, Bishop of Auxerre, sent to Britain to confute the
            Pelagians, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxii" style="text-align: left">xxii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiii" style="text-align: left">xxiii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg014" style="text-align: left">14</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg032" style="text-align: left">32</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg033" style="text-align: left">33</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg034" style="text-align: left">34</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            church dedicated to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg033" style="text-align: left">33</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            stills a tempest, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg033" style="text-align: left">33</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg034" style="text-align: left">34</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            casts out evil spirits, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg034" style="text-align: left">34</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            converts the heretics, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg034" style="text-align: left">34</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg035" style="text-align: left">35</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg036" style="text-align: left">36</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg039" style="text-align: left">39</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg040" style="text-align: left">40</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg041" style="text-align: left">41</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            heals a blind girl, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg035" style="text-align: left">35</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            at St. Alban's tomb, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg035" style="text-align: left">35</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg036" style="text-align: left">36</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            quenches a fire, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg036" style="text-align: left">36</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg037" style="text-align: left">37</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            healed of lameness by a vision, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg036" style="text-align: left">36</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg037" style="text-align: left">37</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            assists the Britons in battle, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg037" style="text-align: left">37</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg038" style="text-align: left">38</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            goes to Ravenna, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg041" style="text-align: left">41</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Duke of Armorica, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg041" style="text-align: left">41</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            returns to Britain, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg039" style="text-align: left">39</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg040" style="text-align: left">40</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg041" style="text-align: left">41</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Germanus, Life
            of,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Constantius-Lyons" style="text-align: left">Constantius</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Germany, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiii" style="text-align: left">xxiii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxx" style="text-align: left">xxx</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg005" style="text-align: left">5</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg161" style="text-align: left">161</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg392" style="text-align: left">392</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            English missions to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg316" style="text-align: left">316</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg317" style="text-align: left">317</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg319" style="text-align: left">319</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg320" style="text-align: left">320</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Gerontius, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Geraint-Gerontius" style="text-align: left">Geraint</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Gertrude, St., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg177" style="text-align: left">177</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Gessoriacum, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Boulogne" style="text-align: left">Boulogne</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Geta, son of Severus, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg013" style="text-align: left">13</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Gewissae, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-West-Saxons" style="text-align: left">West Saxons</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Gidley, Rev. L., his translation of the <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Ecclesiastical History,”</span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxi" style="text-align: left">xxi</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Gildas, historian, editorial references to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxii" style="text-align: left">xxii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg005" style="text-align: left">5</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg019" style="text-align: left">19</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg025" style="text-align: left">25</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg042" style="text-align: left">42</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“De Excidio
            Liber Querulus,”</span> quoted, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg042" style="text-align: left">42</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Giles, Dr., his translation of the <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Ecclesiastical History,”</span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgv" style="text-align: left">v</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxx" style="text-align: left">xx</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxi" style="text-align: left">xxi</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Gilling, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg165" style="text-align: left">165</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Gilling, Abbot of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Trumhere" style="text-align: left">Trumhere</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Tunbert" style="text-align: left">Tunbert</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Giudan, Sea of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">i.e.</span></span>, Firth of Forth, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg023" style="text-align: left">23</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Giudi (probably Inchkeith), <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg023" style="text-align: left">23</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Glen, the river, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg120" style="text-align: left">120</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Glendale, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg119" style="text-align: left">119</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Gloucestershire, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg084" style="text-align: left">84</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Goat's Head, At the, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Gateshead-on-Tyne" style="text-align: left">Gateshead</a>.
          </div>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page417">[pg 417]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg417"/>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Gobban, one of Fursa's priests, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg177" style="text-align: left">177</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Godmunddingham"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Godmunddingaham, or Goodmanham, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg118" style="text-align: left">118</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Godwin"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Godwin, Archbishop of Lyons, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg316" style="text-align: left">316</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Godwine, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg246" style="text-align: left">246</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Goidels"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Goidels, or Gaels, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg007" style="text-align: left">7</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg024" style="text-align: left">24</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Golgotha, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg339" style="text-align: left">339</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg340" style="text-align: left">340</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg341" style="text-align: left">341</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Goodmanham, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Godmunddingham" style="text-align: left">Godmunddingaham</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Gordianus, father of Gregory, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg075" style="text-align: left">75</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Gore's <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Bampton
            Lectures,”</span> editorial references to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg019" style="text-align: left">19</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg255" style="text-align: left">255</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Goths, The, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg022" style="text-align: left">22</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg382" style="text-align: left">382</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Grampians, the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg141" style="text-align: left">141</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Grantacaestir, or Grantchester, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg261" style="text-align: left">261</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg262" style="text-align: left">262</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Gratian, Emperor, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg020" style="text-align: left">20</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            slain by Maximus, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg382" style="text-align: left">382</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Gratian, or Gratianus, tyrant in Britain, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg022" style="text-align: left">22</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Greece, churches of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg196" style="text-align: left">196</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Greek"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Greek, or Eastern Church, practices of the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg214" style="text-align: left">214</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg215" style="text-align: left">215</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Green"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Green, J. R., his <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Making of England,”</span> editorial
            references to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg032" style="text-align: left">32</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg084" style="text-align: left">84</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg188" style="text-align: left">188</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Gregorian Music, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg077" style="text-align: left">77</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg133" style="text-align: left">133</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg358" style="text-align: left">358</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Gregorian
            Sacramentary,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Liber-Sacramentorum" style="text-align: left"><span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Liber Sacramentorum.”</span></a>
</div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Gregory-Great"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Gregory the Great, St., Pope, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxiv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxv" style="text-align: left">xxv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxviii" style="text-align: left">xxxviii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg002" style="text-align: left">2</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg003" style="text-align: left">3</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg045" style="text-align: left">45</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg093" style="text-align: left">93</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg122" style="text-align: left">122</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg126" style="text-align: left">126</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg213" style="text-align: left">213</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg218" style="text-align: left">218</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            account of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg042" style="text-align: left">42</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg075" style="text-align: left">75-83</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his genealogy, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg075" style="text-align: left">75</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg076" style="text-align: left">76</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his character, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg075" style="text-align: left">75</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his pontificate, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg075" style="text-align: left">75</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg081" style="text-align: left">81</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            sent to Constantinople, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg077" style="text-align: left">77</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg083" style="text-align: left">83</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            confutes the heresy of Eutychius, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg078" style="text-align: left">78</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his learning and literary works, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg077" style="text-align: left">77</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg078" style="text-align: left">78</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg079" style="text-align: left">79</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg080" style="text-align: left">80</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg081" style="text-align: left">81</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his connection with Church music, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg133" style="text-align: left">133</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his meeting with the Anglian slaves, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg082" style="text-align: left">82</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            sends Augustine on a mission to Britain to convert the English,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg042" style="text-align: left">42</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg043" style="text-align: left">43</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg045" style="text-align: left">45</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg049" style="text-align: left">49</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg075" style="text-align: left">75</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg080" style="text-align: left">80</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg083" style="text-align: left">83</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg131" style="text-align: left">131</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg383" style="text-align: left">383</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            letter recommending Augustine and Candidus to Aetherius, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg044" style="text-align: left">44</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            letters to Augustine and the English mission, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg043" style="text-align: left">43</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg064" style="text-align: left">64</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg065" style="text-align: left">65</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg068" style="text-align: left">68</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg069" style="text-align: left">69</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg290" style="text-align: left">290</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            letter to Vergilius, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg063" style="text-align: left">63</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg064" style="text-align: left">64</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            letter to Mellitus, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg066" style="text-align: left">66</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg067" style="text-align: left">67</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg068" style="text-align: left">68</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            sends the pall to Augustine, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg064" style="text-align: left">64</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg065" style="text-align: left">65</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg383" style="text-align: left">383</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            letter to Ethelbert, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg069" style="text-align: left">69-72</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his gifts to Ethelbert, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg069" style="text-align: left">69</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg071" style="text-align: left">71</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his answers to Augustine's questions on discipline, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxiv</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg049" style="text-align: left">49-63</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg079" style="text-align: left">79</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg084" style="text-align: left">84</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg085" style="text-align: left">85</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            private letters, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg079" style="text-align: left">79</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            sends Paulinus to Britain, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg064" style="text-align: left">64</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg383" style="text-align: left">383</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his weak health, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg079" style="text-align: left">79</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg075" style="text-align: left">75</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg081" style="text-align: left">81</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg384" style="text-align: left">384</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            burial, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg081" style="text-align: left">81</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            epitaph, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg081" style="text-align: left">81</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg082" style="text-align: left">82</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            altar dedicated to him at SS. Peter and Paul's, Canterbury,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg090" style="text-align: left">90</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            quoted, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg333" style="text-align: left">333</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg334" style="text-align: left">334</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his disciples, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg348" style="text-align: left">348</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg358" style="text-align: left">358</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            lives of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg075" style="text-align: left">75</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg083" style="text-align: left">83</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            and <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Dudden" style="text-align: left">Dudden</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Whitby-Monk" style="text-align: left">Whitby</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Gregory, St., Martyr, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg210" style="text-align: left">210</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Gregory II, Pope, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg002" style="text-align: left">2</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg314" style="text-align: left">314</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Gregory III, Pope, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg002" style="text-align: left">2</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Guest, editorial reference to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg032" style="text-align: left">32</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Guthfrid"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Guthfrid, Abbot of Lindisfarne, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg301" style="text-align: left">301</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg302" style="text-align: left">302</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Guthlac, St., his Hermitage, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg380" style="text-align: left">380</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Gwynedd, King of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Caedwalla-Cadwallon" style="text-align: left">Caedwalla</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Cadvan" style="text-align: left">Cadvan</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Habakkuk, quoted, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg368" style="text-align: left">368</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Habetdeus, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg179" style="text-align: left">179</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hackness, or Hacanos, Monastery of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg275" style="text-align: left">275</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg276" style="text-align: left">276</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hackness, Abbess of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Hilda" style="text-align: left">Hilda</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hackness, Prioress of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Frigyth" style="text-align: left">Frigyth</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Haddan-Stubbs"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Haddan and Stubbs, <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Councils and Ecclesiastical
            Documents,”</span> editorial references to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg084" style="text-align: left">84</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg087" style="text-align: left">87</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg306" style="text-align: left">306</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg315" style="text-align: left">315</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg316" style="text-align: left">316</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg319" style="text-align: left">319</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg343" style="text-align: left">343</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg345" style="text-align: left">345</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg379" style="text-align: left">379</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg380" style="text-align: left">380</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg391" style="text-align: left">391</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Haddenham, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg220" style="text-align: left">220</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hades, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg326" style="text-align: left">326</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg327" style="text-align: left">327</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg329" style="text-align: left">329</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg330" style="text-align: left">330</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hadrian, Pope, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg219" style="text-align: left">219</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hadrian, Emperor, his wall, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg013" style="text-align: left">13</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg025" style="text-align: left">25</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg026" style="text-align: left">26</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg136" style="text-align: left">136</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg137" style="text-align: left">137</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Hadrian-Abbot"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hadrian, Abbot of Niridanum and later of St. Augustine's
            Monastery, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page418">[pg
            418]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" style="text-align: left" id="Pg418"/> Canterbury, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxviii" style="text-align: left">xxviii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxx" style="text-align: left">xxx</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg214" style="text-align: left">214</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg316" style="text-align: left">316</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg343" style="text-align: left">343</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg377" style="text-align: left">377</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            refuses the English Archbishopric, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg002" style="text-align: left">2</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg214" style="text-align: left">214</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            recommends Andrew, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg214" style="text-align: left">214</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            recommends Theodore, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg002" style="text-align: left">2</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg214" style="text-align: left">214</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            accompanies Theodore on his journey to Britain, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg002" style="text-align: left">2</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg213" style="text-align: left">213</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg214" style="text-align: left">214</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg215" style="text-align: left">215</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            detained by Ebroin at Quentavic, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg216" style="text-align: left">216</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his arrival in Britain, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg216" style="text-align: left">216</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg357" style="text-align: left">357</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            made Abbot of St. Augustine's, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg216" style="text-align: left">216</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his learning, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg216" style="text-align: left">216</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg217" style="text-align: left">217</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg357" style="text-align: left">357</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            accompanies Theodore in his pastoral visitations, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg216" style="text-align: left">216</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg217" style="text-align: left">217</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg357" style="text-align: left">357</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            buried in St. Augustine's, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg357" style="text-align: left">357</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Hadulac"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hadulac, Bishop of Elmham, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg379" style="text-align: left">379</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg380" style="text-align: left">380</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Haedde"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Haedde, Bishop of Winchester after Leutherius, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg148" style="text-align: left">148</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg241" style="text-align: left">241</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            supposed to be identical with Aetla, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg272" style="text-align: left">272</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his character, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg342" style="text-align: left">342</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            resists Bertwald's division of the Bishopric, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg343" style="text-align: left">343</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg342" style="text-align: left">342</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg343" style="text-align: left">343</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            posthumous miracles, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg343" style="text-align: left">343</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Haemgils, a monk, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg330" style="text-align: left">330</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Haethfelth-Chase"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Haethfelth (Hatfield Chase, near Doncaster), Battle of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxv" style="text-align: left">xxv</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg131" style="text-align: left">131</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Haethfelth (Hatfield, Hertfordshire), Synod of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxix" style="text-align: left">xxix</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg254" style="text-align: left">254</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg255" style="text-align: left">255</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg256" style="text-align: left">256</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg259" style="text-align: left">259</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg385" style="text-align: left">385</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hagustald, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Hexham" style="text-align: left">Hexham</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hallelujah, or Allelujah, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg080" style="text-align: left">80</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg083" style="text-align: left">83</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hallelujah victory of Germanus, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg038" style="text-align: left">38</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg039" style="text-align: left">39</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hallington, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg136" style="text-align: left">136</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Halydene, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg136" style="text-align: left">136</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Hamble"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hamble, or Homelea, The River, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg253" style="text-align: left">253</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hampshire, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg253" style="text-align: left">253</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg343" style="text-align: left">343</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Harold, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg246" style="text-align: left">246</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Hartlepool"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hartlepool, Heruteu, or the Island of the Hart, Monastery at,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg190" style="text-align: left">190</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg271" style="text-align: left">271</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hartlepool, Abbess of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Heiu" style="text-align: left">Heiu</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Hilda" style="text-align: left">Hilda</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Hateful Year,
            The,”</span> in Northumbria, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxv" style="text-align: left">xxv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg135" style="text-align: left">135</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hatfield, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Haethfelth-Chase" style="text-align: left">Haethfelth</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hatfield Chase, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Haethfelth-Chase" style="text-align: left">Haethfelth</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Haverfield, editorial reference to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg013" style="text-align: left">13</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Haymo, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Emme" style="text-align: left">Emme</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Healaugh, Monastery of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg271" style="text-align: left">271</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Heavenly Field, the, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Hefenfelth" style="text-align: left">Hefenfelth</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Hebrews, The
            Epistle to the,”</span> quoted, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg079" style="text-align: left">79</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hebron, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg341" style="text-align: left">341</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg342" style="text-align: left">342</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hecana, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Hereford" style="text-align: left">Hereford</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Hedda"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hedda, Bishop of Lichfield, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg379" style="text-align: left">379</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Hefenfelth"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hefenfelth, or The Heavenly Field, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg136" style="text-align: left">136</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg137" style="text-align: left">137</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Heiu"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Heiu, first Northumbrian nun, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg271" style="text-align: left">271</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg275" style="text-align: left">275</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            founds the monastery of Hartlepool, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg271" style="text-align: left">271</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            retires to Calcaria, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg271" style="text-align: left">271</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg272" style="text-align: left">272</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            her gravestone, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg271" style="text-align: left">271</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Helen, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg264" style="text-align: left">264</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Helena, mother of Constantine, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg019" style="text-align: left">19</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            legality of her marriage, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg019" style="text-align: left">19</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            her Finding of the True Cross, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg339" style="text-align: left">339</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg340" style="text-align: left">340</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Heliand, The, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg277" style="text-align: left">277</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Heligoland, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg323" style="text-align: left">323</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hell, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg051" style="text-align: left">51</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg327" style="text-align: left">327</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg328" style="text-align: left">328</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg335" style="text-align: left">335</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hengist, leader of the Anglo-Saxons, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg030" style="text-align: left">30</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg045" style="text-align: left">45</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg095" style="text-align: left">95</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Henry VIII, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg275" style="text-align: left">275</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Heracleonas, or Heraclius, Emperor, son of Heraclius, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg127" style="text-align: left">127</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Heraclius, Emperor, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg127" style="text-align: left">127</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Herbert, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Herebert" style="text-align: left">Herebert</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Herebald"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Herebald, Abbot of Tynemouth, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg309" style="text-align: left">309</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg310" style="text-align: left">310</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg311" style="text-align: left">311</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Herebert"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Herebert, St., a hermit, the friend of Cuthbert, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg294" style="text-align: left">294</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg295" style="text-align: left">295</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Hereford"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hereford, See of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg218" style="text-align: left">218</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg380" style="text-align: left">380</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hereford, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Putta-Hereford" style="text-align: left">Putta</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Tyrhtel" style="text-align: left">Tyrhtel</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Torthere" style="text-align: left">Torthere</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Wahlstod" style="text-align: left">Wahlstod</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Herefrid, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg391" style="text-align: left">391</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hereric, nephew of Edwin, and father of Hilda, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg270" style="text-align: left">270</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            poisoned by Cerdic, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg274" style="text-align: left">274</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Heresuid, sister of Hilda, and wife of Ethelhere, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg271" style="text-align: left">271</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Heriburg"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Heriburg, Abbess of Watton, her daughter healed by John of
            <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page419">[pg 419]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" style="text-align: left" id="Pg419"/> Beverley's prayers, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg305" style="text-align: left">305</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg306" style="text-align: left">306</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg307" style="text-align: left">307</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hermit, a British, lays a trap for Augustine, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg086" style="text-align: left">86</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Hertford"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hertford, Synod of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxviii" style="text-align: left">xxviii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg226" style="text-align: left">226</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg227" style="text-align: left">227</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg384" style="text-align: left">384</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hertfordshire, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg010" style="text-align: left">10</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg018" style="text-align: left">18</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg255" style="text-align: left">255</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Heruteu, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Hartlepool" style="text-align: left">Hartlepool</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Herutford, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Hertford" style="text-align: left">Hertford</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hewalds, The Two (Black and White), martyrs, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg320" style="text-align: left">320</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg321" style="text-align: left">321</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg322" style="text-align: left">322</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Hexham"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hexham, or Hagustald, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxx" style="text-align: left">xxx</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg136" style="text-align: left">136</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg137" style="text-align: left">137</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg243" style="text-align: left">243</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg303" style="text-align: left">303</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            diocese of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg137" style="text-align: left">137</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg353" style="text-align: left">353</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hexham, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Acca" style="text-align: left">Acca</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Eata" style="text-align: left">Eata</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Frithbert" style="text-align: left">Frithbert</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-John-Beverley" style="text-align: left">John</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Tunbert" style="text-align: left">Tunbert</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Wilfrid-St" style="text-align: left">Wilfrid</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hiddila, priest to Bernwin, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg252" style="text-align: left">252</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hii, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Iona" style="text-align: left">Iona</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hilarus, arch-presbyter, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg129" style="text-align: left">129</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Hilda"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hilda, St., daughter of Hereric, Abbess of Hartlepool and
            afterwards of Whitby, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxix" style="text-align: left">xxix</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg190" style="text-align: left">190</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg270" style="text-align: left">270</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg271" style="text-align: left">271</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg272" style="text-align: left">272</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            account of her life, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg270" style="text-align: left">270-275</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            builds the monastery of Streanaeshalch or Whitby, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg190" style="text-align: left">190</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg272" style="text-align: left">272</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            her attitude on the Easter question, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg195" style="text-align: left">195</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            her opposition to Wilfrid, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg195" style="text-align: left">195</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            her character, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg272" style="text-align: left">272</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            her pupils, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg272" style="text-align: left">272</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg273" style="text-align: left">273</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg274" style="text-align: left">274</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            illness and death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg270" style="text-align: left">270</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg275" style="text-align: left">275</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg385" style="text-align: left">385</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            friendship for Aidan, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg272" style="text-align: left">272</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hildilid, pupil of Aldhelm, Abbess of Barking after Ethelburg,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg237" style="text-align: left">237</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg344" style="text-align: left">344</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“History of the
            Abbots,”</span> Anonymous, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Abbots" style="text-align: left">Abbots</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Bede's, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Bede" style="text-align: left">Bede</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Hlothere"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hlothere, King of Kent after Egbert, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxviii" style="text-align: left">xxviii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxix" style="text-align: left">xxix</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg230" style="text-align: left">230</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg254" style="text-align: left">254</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg269" style="text-align: left">269</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Edric's revolt against, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg287" style="text-align: left">287</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            grants Bertwald land in Thanet, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg315" style="text-align: left">315</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg285" style="text-align: left">285</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg287" style="text-align: left">287</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg385" style="text-align: left">385</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Holder, editor of the <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Ecclesiastical History,”</span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxx" style="text-align: left">xx</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Holmhurst, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg018" style="text-align: left">18</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Holy Island, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Lindisfarne" style="text-align: left">Lindisfarne</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Holy Housel, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg275" style="text-align: left">275</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Homelea, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Hamble" style="text-align: left">Hamble</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Honorius, Emperor, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg021" style="text-align: left">21</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg022" style="text-align: left">22</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg026" style="text-align: left">26</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Honorius, Pope, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxv" style="text-align: left">xxv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg105" style="text-align: left">105</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg124" style="text-align: left">124</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg132" style="text-align: left">132</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            sends the Pall to Paulinus, and to Archbishop Honorius, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg124" style="text-align: left">124</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg125" style="text-align: left">125</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg126" style="text-align: left">126</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg127" style="text-align: left">127</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his letters, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg124" style="text-align: left">124-130</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            sends Birinus to the West Saxons, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg147" style="text-align: left">147</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg148" style="text-align: left">148</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Honorius-Archbishop"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Honorius, Archbishop of Canterbury after Justus, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxv" style="text-align: left">xxv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg123" style="text-align: left">123</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg125" style="text-align: left">125</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg126" style="text-align: left">126</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg132" style="text-align: left">132</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg163" style="text-align: left">163</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg164" style="text-align: left">164</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg193" style="text-align: left">193</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            ordained by Paulinus, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg126" style="text-align: left">126</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            receives the Pall from Pope Honorius, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg125" style="text-align: left">125</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg126" style="text-align: left">126</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            sends Felix to East Anglia, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg122" style="text-align: left">122</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            a disciple of Pope Gregory, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg348" style="text-align: left">348</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg178" style="text-align: left">178</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg179" style="text-align: left">179</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Horsa, brother of Hengist, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg030" style="text-align: left">30</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Horse, miraculously cured at Oswald's death-place, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg155" style="text-align: left">155</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Horsted, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg030" style="text-align: left">30</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            House Island, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Farne" style="text-align: left">Farne</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hreutford, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Redbridge" style="text-align: left">Redbridge</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hrof, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg089" style="text-align: left">89</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hrofaescaestrae, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Rochester" style="text-align: left">Rochester</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Huaetbert"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Huaetbert, Abbot of Wearmouth and Jarrow, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxxiv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxl" style="text-align: left">xl</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg389" style="text-align: left">389</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Huddersfield, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg120" style="text-align: left">120</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hugh de Puisac, erects a shrine at Durham, for the bones of Bede
            and others, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxl" style="text-align: left">xl</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hull, The River, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg303" style="text-align: left">303</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Humber, The River, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg030" style="text-align: left">30</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg045" style="text-align: left">45</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg082" style="text-align: left">82</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg089" style="text-align: left">89</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg094" style="text-align: left">94</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg102" style="text-align: left">102</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg122" style="text-align: left">122</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg164" style="text-align: left">164</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg320" style="text-align: left">320</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg380" style="text-align: left">380</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hunt, Dr., his <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“History of the English Church,”</span>
            editorial references to, vi, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg084" style="text-align: left">84</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Huntingdonshire, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg179" style="text-align: left">179</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Huns, The, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg027" style="text-align: left">27</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg317" style="text-align: left">317</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hunwald, betrays Oswin, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg164" style="text-align: left">164</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hurst, W., his translation of the <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Ecclesiastical History,”</span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxi" style="text-align: left">xxi</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hussey, his edition of the <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Ecclesiastical History,”</span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxx" style="text-align: left">xx</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg392" style="text-align: left">392</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hwiccas, The, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg084" style="text-align: left">84</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg243" style="text-align: left">243</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            diocese of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Worcester" style="text-align: left">Worcester</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hwiccas, King of the, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Aenhere" style="text-align: left">Aenhere</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Eanfrid-Hwiccas" style="text-align: left">Eanfrid</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hwiccas, sub-king of the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg377" style="text-align: left">377</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            and <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Osric-Hwiccas" style="text-align: left">Osric</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Hygbald"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hygbald, Abbot of Bardney, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg223" style="text-align: left">223</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg224" style="text-align: left">224</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Hymns, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg264" style="text-align: left">264-267</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg389" style="text-align: left">389</a>.
          </div>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page420">[pg 420]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg420"/>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            I (Iona), <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg140" style="text-align: left">140</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Ibas"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ibas, Bishop of Edessa, his heresy, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg255" style="text-align: left">255</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg256" style="text-align: left">256</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Ida"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ida, first King of Bernicia, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg073" style="text-align: left">73</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg383" style="text-align: left">383</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg391" style="text-align: left">391</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            account of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg383" style="text-align: left">383</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            founds Bamborough, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg147" style="text-align: left">147</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg383" style="text-align: left">383</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Idle, the Battle of the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg115" style="text-align: left">115</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Idols, destruction of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg067" style="text-align: left">67</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg070" style="text-align: left">70</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg151" style="text-align: left">151</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ii (Iona), <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg140" style="text-align: left">140</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Imma, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg268" style="text-align: left">268</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg269" style="text-align: left">269</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg270" style="text-align: left">270</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Immersion, Single, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg087" style="text-align: left">87</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Immin, Mercian chief, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg191" style="text-align: left">191</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg192" style="text-align: left">192</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Importunus"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Importunus, Bishop of Paris, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg194" style="text-align: left">194</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            In Berecingum, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Barking" style="text-align: left">Barking</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            In Brige, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Brige" style="text-align: left">Brige</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            In Compendio, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Compiegne" style="text-align: left">Compiègne</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Incuneningum, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg325" style="text-align: left">325</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Inderauuda, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-John-Beverley" style="text-align: left">John of Beverley</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Indictions, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg227" style="text-align: left">227</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg254" style="text-align: left">254</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Indulgences, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg294" style="text-align: left">294</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Infeppingum, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg181" style="text-align: left">181</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ingetlingum, monastery of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg164" style="text-align: left">164</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg165" style="text-align: left">165</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg191" style="text-align: left">191</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Ingwald"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ingwald, Bishop of London, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg379" style="text-align: left">379</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg380" style="text-align: left">380</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg391" style="text-align: left">391</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ingyruum, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg359" style="text-align: left">359</a>, and <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Jarrow" style="text-align: left">Jarrow</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Inhrypum, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ripon" style="text-align: left">Ripon</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Ini"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ini, or Ine, King of Wessex after Caedwalla, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxx" style="text-align: left">xxx</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg314" style="text-align: left">314</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            conquers Sussex, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg251" style="text-align: left">251</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Dooms,”</span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg231" style="text-align: left">231</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg251" style="text-align: left">251</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Aldhelm's influence with, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg343" style="text-align: left">343</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his abdication and pilgrimage to Rome, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg314" style="text-align: left">314</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg345" style="text-align: left">345</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Inisboufinde, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Innisboffin" style="text-align: left">Innisboffin</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Inishmahee, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Cromanus" style="text-align: left">Cronan</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Inlade, the river, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg315" style="text-align: left">315</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Inlitore, now Kaiserwerth, Monastery at, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg324" style="text-align: left">324</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Innisboffin"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Innisboffin, Inisboufinde, or The Island of the White Heifer,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg225" style="text-align: left">225</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg226" style="text-align: left">226</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Intiningaham, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Tininghame" style="text-align: left">Tininghame</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Inundalum, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Oundle" style="text-align: left">Oundle</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Inver-Daeile"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Inver Daeile, or Ennereilly, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Dagan" style="text-align: left">Dagan</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Inverness, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg140" style="text-align: left">140</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Iona"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Iona, Hii, I or Ii, the island of, included in Ireland, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxv" style="text-align: left">xxv</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg092" style="text-align: left">92</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg191" style="text-align: left">191</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg201" style="text-align: left">201</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg225" style="text-align: left">225</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            given to Columba by Bridius or by Conall, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg142" style="text-align: left">142</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            its monastery founded by Columba, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg142" style="text-align: left">142</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg383" style="text-align: left">383</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            its constitution and jurisdiction, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg139" style="text-align: left">139</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg140" style="text-align: left">140</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg142" style="text-align: left">142</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg169" style="text-align: left">169</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg181" style="text-align: left">181</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg183" style="text-align: left">183</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg318" style="text-align: left">318</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            its monks converted to Catholic usages, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxi" style="text-align: left">xxxi</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxix" style="text-align: left">xxxix</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg337" style="text-align: left">337</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg373" style="text-align: left">373</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg374" style="text-align: left">374</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg375" style="text-align: left">375</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg376" style="text-align: left">376</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg377" style="text-align: left">377</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            piety of its Abbots, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg143" style="text-align: left">143</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            derivation of the name, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg140" style="text-align: left">140</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Iona, Abbot of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Adamnan-Iona" style="text-align: left">Adamnan</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Columba-Columcille" style="text-align: left">Columba</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Segeni" style="text-align: left">Segeni</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Ireland"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ireland, History of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxix" style="text-align: left">xxix</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg005" style="text-align: left">5</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg007" style="text-align: left">7</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg008" style="text-align: left">8</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg009" style="text-align: left">9</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg091" style="text-align: left">91</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg092" style="text-align: left">92</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg094" style="text-align: left">94</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg161" style="text-align: left">161</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg177" style="text-align: left">177</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg191" style="text-align: left">191</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg204" style="text-align: left">204</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg285" style="text-align: left">285</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg306" style="text-align: left">306</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg337" style="text-align: left">337</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg373" style="text-align: left">373</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg383" style="text-align: left">383</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            description of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg007" style="text-align: left">7</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg008" style="text-align: left">8</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg009" style="text-align: left">9</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            its hospitality to the English monks, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg204" style="text-align: left">204</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Irish, or Scots, Bishop of the, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Palladius" style="text-align: left">Palladius</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Irish Annals, editorial reference to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg337" style="text-align: left">337</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Irish-Church"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Irish Church, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiii" style="text-align: left">xxiii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxv" style="text-align: left">xxv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxx" style="text-align: left">xxx</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxix" style="text-align: left">xxxix</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg087" style="text-align: left">87</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg138" style="text-align: left">138</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg139" style="text-align: left">139</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg142" style="text-align: left">142</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg143" style="text-align: left">143</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg144" style="text-align: left">144</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg193" style="text-align: left">193-201</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg336" style="text-align: left">336</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg374" style="text-align: left">374-377</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Irminric"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Irminric, father of Ethelbert, King of Kent, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg095" style="text-align: left">95</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Isaac, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg387" style="text-align: left">387</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his tomb, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg341" style="text-align: left">341</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Isaiah, quoted, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg186" style="text-align: left">186</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg209" style="text-align: left">209</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ishmael, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg378" style="text-align: left">378</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Isle of Wight, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Wight" style="text-align: left">Wight</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Israel, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg067" style="text-align: left">67</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg341" style="text-align: left">341</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Itala, the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg366" style="text-align: left">366</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg368" style="text-align: left">368</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Italian Sea, the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg132" style="text-align: left">132</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Italy, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg006" style="text-align: left">6</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg020" style="text-align: left">20</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg079" style="text-align: left">79</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg092" style="text-align: left">92</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg093" style="text-align: left">93</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg196" style="text-align: left">196</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Itchen, the river, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg252" style="text-align: left">252</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Ithamar"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ithamar, Bishop of Rochester, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg164" style="text-align: left">164</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg178" style="text-align: left">178</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg179" style="text-align: left">179</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Iudeu, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg023" style="text-align: left">23</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg189" style="text-align: left">189</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ixning, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ermynge" style="text-align: left">Ermynge</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Jacobsburgh, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Akeburg" style="text-align: left">Akeburgh</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Jacob's Tomb, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg341" style="text-align: left">341</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            James, St., quoted, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg197" style="text-align: left">197</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg372" style="text-align: left">372</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            James the Less, St., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg215" style="text-align: left">215</a> n.
          </div>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page421">[pg 421]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg421"/>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            James the Deacon, companion of Paulinus, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxv" style="text-align: left">xxv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg123" style="text-align: left">123</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            left at York when Paulinus flees into Kent, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg132" style="text-align: left">132</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            a village named after him, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg132" style="text-align: left">132</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            teaches Church music, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg132" style="text-align: left">132</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg133" style="text-align: left">133</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg217" style="text-align: left">217</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            observes the Catholic Easter, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg193" style="text-align: left">193</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg195" style="text-align: left">195</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            at Whitby, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg195" style="text-align: left">195</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg133" style="text-align: left">133</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Jarrow"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Jarrow, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Wearmouth-Jarrow" style="text-align: left">Wearmouth and Jarrow</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Jarrow, Abbot of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Benedict-Biscop" style="text-align: left">Benedict Biscop</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ceolfrid" style="text-align: left">Ceolfrid</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Huaetbert" style="text-align: left">Huaetbert</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Jaruman"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Jaruman, Bishop of Mercia, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxviii" style="text-align: left">xxviii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg192" style="text-align: left">192</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg206" style="text-align: left">206</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg351" style="text-align: left">351</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his mission to the East Saxons, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg212" style="text-align: left">212</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg245" style="text-align: left">245</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg218" style="text-align: left">218</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Jerome, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg021" style="text-align: left">21</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg387" style="text-align: left">387</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Jerusalem, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg337" style="text-align: left">337</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg339" style="text-align: left">339</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg340" style="text-align: left">340</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg341" style="text-align: left">341</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Jet, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg006" style="text-align: left">6</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Jezebel, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg349" style="text-align: left">349</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Job, quoted, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg080" style="text-align: left">80</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg370" style="text-align: left">370</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his tonsure, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg370" style="text-align: left">370</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Commentary
            on,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Gregory-Great" style="text-align: left">Gregory</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            John the Baptist, St., his martyrdom, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg053" style="text-align: left">53</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            John the Deacon, author of <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Life of Gregory,”</span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg075" style="text-align: left">75</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg081" style="text-align: left">81</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg083" style="text-align: left">83</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            John the Evangelist, St., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxlii" style="text-align: left">xlii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg304" style="text-align: left">304</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his celebration of Easter, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg196" style="text-align: left">196</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg197" style="text-align: left">197</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg198" style="text-align: left">198</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            quoted, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg335" style="text-align: left">335</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg363" style="text-align: left">363</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            John IV, Pope, consecrated, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg128" style="text-align: left">128</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his letter to the Scots, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg128" style="text-align: left">128</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg129" style="text-align: left">129</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg130" style="text-align: left">130</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg144" style="text-align: left">144</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            John VI, Pope, Wilfrid's cause tried before, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg353" style="text-align: left">353</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-John-Arles"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            John, Archbishop of Arles, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg215" style="text-align: left">215</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            John, Chief of the Papal notaries, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg129" style="text-align: left">129</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-John-Beverley"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            John of Beverley, Bishop of Hexham after Eata, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxix" style="text-align: left">xxix</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg302" style="text-align: left">302</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg353" style="text-align: left">353</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            a pupil of Hilda, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg273" style="text-align: left">273</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            of Theodore, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg305" style="text-align: left">305</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            appointed Bishop of York, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg305" style="text-align: left">305</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg356" style="text-align: left">356</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            ordains Bede, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxiii" style="text-align: left">xxxiii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg386" style="text-align: left">386</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his miracles, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg302" style="text-align: left">302</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg303" style="text-align: left">303</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg304" style="text-align: left">304</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg305" style="text-align: left">305</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg306" style="text-align: left">306</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg307" style="text-align: left">307</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg308" style="text-align: left">308</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg309" style="text-align: left">309</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg310" style="text-align: left">310</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg311" style="text-align: left">311</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            at Erneshow, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg303" style="text-align: left">303</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg304" style="text-align: left">304</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            at Watton, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg305" style="text-align: left">305</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg306" style="text-align: left">306</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            consecrates churches, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg307" style="text-align: left">307</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg308" style="text-align: left">308</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            resigns the bishopric of York and retires to Beverley, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg312" style="text-align: left">312</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            ordains his successor, Wilfrid II, Bishop of York, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg312" style="text-align: left">312</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg311" style="text-align: left">311</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg312" style="text-align: left">312</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            buried at St. Peter's, Beverley, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg311" style="text-align: left">311</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg312" style="text-align: left">312</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            John, a martyr, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg210" style="text-align: left">210</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-John-Precentor"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            John, the precentor, brought into Britain to teach Church music,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg258" style="text-align: left">258</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Abbot of St. Martin's Monastery, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg257" style="text-align: left">257</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            at the Synod of Haethfelth, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg257" style="text-align: left">257</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg258" style="text-align: left">258</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg259" style="text-align: left">259</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg385" style="text-align: left">385</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            dies on his way back to Rome, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg259" style="text-align: left">259</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            buried at Tours, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg259" style="text-align: left">259</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Jonah, quoted, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg319" style="text-align: left">319</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Joseph, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg341" style="text-align: left">341</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg370" style="text-align: left">370</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Julianus"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Julianus of Campania, heretic Bishop of Eclanum, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg021" style="text-align: left">21</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Julius, British martyr, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg018" style="text-align: left">18</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Julius Caesar, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Caesar" style="text-align: left">Caesar</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Justin II, Emperor, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg140" style="text-align: left">140</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Justinian I, Emperor, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg140" style="text-align: left">140</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg203" style="text-align: left">203</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg256" style="text-align: left">256</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Justinian II, Emperor, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg314" style="text-align: left">314</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Justus"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Justus, Bishop of Rochester, afterwards Archbishop of Canterbury,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxiv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg089" style="text-align: left">89</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg092" style="text-align: left">92</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg100" style="text-align: left">100</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            sent by Gregory to Augustine, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg064" style="text-align: left">64</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            takes refuge in Gaul, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxiv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg096" style="text-align: left">96</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg097" style="text-align: left">97</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            ordains Romanus Bishop of Rochester, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg100" style="text-align: left">100</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            ordains Paulinus, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg103" style="text-align: left">103</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg384" style="text-align: left">384</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            sends Romanus on a mission to Pope Honorius, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg132" style="text-align: left">132</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg123" style="text-align: left">123</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg125" style="text-align: left">125</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Jutes, the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg030" style="text-align: left">30</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg031" style="text-align: left">31</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg245" style="text-align: left">245</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg252" style="text-align: left">252</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Jutland, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg030" style="text-align: left">30</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg317" style="text-align: left">317</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Kaelcacaestir, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Calcaria" style="text-align: left">Calcaria</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Kaiserswerth, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg324" style="text-align: left">324</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Katwyk, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg320" style="text-align: left">320</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Kent, history, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxii" style="text-align: left">xxii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxix" style="text-align: left">xxix</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg002" style="text-align: left">2</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg005" style="text-align: left">5</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg030" style="text-align: left">30</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg089" style="text-align: left">89</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg093" style="text-align: left">93</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg094" style="text-align: left">94</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg096" style="text-align: left">96</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg102" style="text-align: left">102</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg127" style="text-align: left">127</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg130" style="text-align: left">130</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg152" style="text-align: left">152</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg166" style="text-align: left">166</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg172" style="text-align: left">172</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg179" style="text-align: left">179</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg217" style="text-align: left">217</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg241" style="text-align: left">241</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg242" style="text-align: left">242</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg245" style="text-align: left">245</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg261" style="text-align: left">261</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg269" style="text-align: left">269</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg273" style="text-align: left">273</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg316" style="text-align: left">316</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg385" style="text-align: left">385</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            language of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg045" style="text-align: left">45</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            settlement of Christianity in, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxii" style="text-align: left">xxii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxiv</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxix" style="text-align: left">xxix</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg095" style="text-align: left">95</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg193" style="text-align: left">193</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg290" style="text-align: left">290</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            diocese of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg323" style="text-align: left">323</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg379" style="text-align: left">379</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg380" style="text-align: left">380</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            and <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Canterbury" style="text-align: left">Canterbury</a> and <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Rochester" style="text-align: left">Rochester</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Kent, king of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Alric" style="text-align: left">Alric</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Eadbert-Kent" style="text-align: left">Eadbert</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Earconbert" style="text-align: left">Earconbert</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Egbert-King" style="text-align: left">Egbert</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ethelbert" style="text-align: left">Ethelbert</a>,
            <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page422">[pg 422]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" style="text-align: left" id="Pg422"/> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Hlothere" style="text-align: left">Hlothere</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Irminric" style="text-align: left">Irminric</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Mul" style="text-align: left">Mul</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Octa" style="text-align: left">Octa</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Oeric" style="text-align: left">Oeric</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Suaebhard" style="text-align: left">Suaebhard</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Wictred" style="text-align: left">Wictred</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Kerslake, T., his <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Vestiges of the Supremacy of Mercia,”</span>
            editorial reference to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg255" style="text-align: left">255</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Kyle, Plain of, conquered by Eadbert, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg392" style="text-align: left">392</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Labienus, the Tribune, slain in battle with the Britons, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg010" style="text-align: left">10</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Laestingaeu, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Lastingham" style="text-align: left">Lastingham</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Lagny"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Lagny-on-the-Marne, or Latineacum, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg178" style="text-align: left">178</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Laistranus, Irish priest, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg129" style="text-align: left">129</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Lammermuir Hills, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg288" style="text-align: left">288</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Lancashire, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg204" style="text-align: left">204</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Lanfranc"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Lanfranc, Archbishop, rebuilds Canterbury Cathedral, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg072" style="text-align: left">72</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Langres, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg257" style="text-align: left">257</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Laodicea, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Anatolius" style="text-align: left">Anatolius</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Lastingham"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Lastingham, or Laestingaeu, Monastery of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvii" style="text-align: left">xxvii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxv" style="text-align: left">xxxv</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg003" style="text-align: left">3</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg185" style="text-align: left">185</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg186" style="text-align: left">186</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg187" style="text-align: left">187</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg207" style="text-align: left">207</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg218" style="text-align: left">218</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg220" style="text-align: left">220</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg351" style="text-align: left">351</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Lastingham, Abbot of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ceadda" style="text-align: left">Ceadda</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Cedd" style="text-align: left">Cedd</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Lateran Councils, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg256" style="text-align: left">256</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg352" style="text-align: left">352</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Latin Language, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg006" style="text-align: left">6</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            poetry, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg264" style="text-align: left">264</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Latineacum, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Lagny" style="text-align: left">Lagny</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Laurentius, St., Deacon and Martyr, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg210" style="text-align: left">210</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Laurentius-Archbishop"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Laurentius, second Archbishop of Canterbury, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxiv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg049" style="text-align: left">49</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg064" style="text-align: left">64</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg091" style="text-align: left">91</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg092" style="text-align: left">92</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg093" style="text-align: left">93</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg096" style="text-align: left">96</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            sent by Augustine to Gregory, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg049" style="text-align: left">49</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            consecrates the Church of SS. Peter and Paul, Canterbury,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg090" style="text-align: left">90</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his letters to the Scots and Britons, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg091" style="text-align: left">91</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg092" style="text-align: left">92</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            rebuked and scourged by St. Peter in a dream, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg097" style="text-align: left">97</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            converts King Eadbald, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg097" style="text-align: left">97</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death and burial, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg098" style="text-align: left">98</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Leah's Tomb, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg341" style="text-align: left">341</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg342" style="text-align: left">342</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Leeds"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Leeds, or Loidis, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg120" style="text-align: left">120</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg189" style="text-align: left">189</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Leeds, or Loidis and Elmet, King of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Cerdic" style="text-align: left">Cerdic</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Legacaestir, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Chester" style="text-align: left">Chester</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Legions, City of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Chester" style="text-align: left">Chester</a> and
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Caerleon" style="text-align: left">Caerleon-on-Usk</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Leicester, Diocese of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg148" style="text-align: left">148</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg379" style="text-align: left">379</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Leicester, Bishop of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg274" style="text-align: left">274</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Leicestershire, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg179" style="text-align: left">179</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Leinster, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg092" style="text-align: left">92</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg141" style="text-align: left">141</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg142" style="text-align: left">142</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Lent, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg038" style="text-align: left">38</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg151" style="text-align: left">151</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg186" style="text-align: left">186</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg206" style="text-align: left">206</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Leptis in Tripolis, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg012" style="text-align: left">12</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Lérins, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg033" style="text-align: left">33</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Leutherius"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Leutherius, or Hlothere, Bishop of Wessex, nephew of Agilbert,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg147" style="text-align: left">147</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg150" style="text-align: left">150</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg151" style="text-align: left">151</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            consecrated by Theodore, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg151" style="text-align: left">151</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            at the Hertford Synod, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg228" style="text-align: left">228</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            ordains Aldhelm, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg343" style="text-align: left">343</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg241" style="text-align: left">241</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Leviticus, quoted <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg279" style="text-align: left">279</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg364" style="text-align: left">364</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Liber-Sacramentorum"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Liber
            Sacramentorum,”</span> or Gregorian Sacramentary, attributed to
            Gregory, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg081" style="text-align: left">81</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Liber
            Eliensis,”</span> editorial reference to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg266" style="text-align: left">266</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Lichfield"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Lichfield, Diocese of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxviii" style="text-align: left">xxviii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg219" style="text-align: left">219</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Cathedral, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg224" style="text-align: left">224</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Lichfield, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Aldwin-Worr" style="text-align: left">Aldwin</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ceadda" style="text-align: left">Ceadda</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Hedda" style="text-align: left">Hedda</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Sexwulf" style="text-align: left">Sexwulf</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Wynfrid" style="text-align: left">Wynfrid</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Liddesdale, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg073" style="text-align: left">73</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Liège, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg177" style="text-align: left">177</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Light, Supernatural, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg157" style="text-align: left">157</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg232" style="text-align: left">232</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg233" style="text-align: left">233</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg234" style="text-align: left">234</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg322" style="text-align: left">322</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Lilla, gives his life for Edwin's, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg104" style="text-align: left">104</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Lincoln, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg122" style="text-align: left">122</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg123" style="text-align: left">123</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg126" style="text-align: left">126</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Lincolnshire, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg122" style="text-align: left">122</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg123" style="text-align: left">123</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg157" style="text-align: left">157</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg179" style="text-align: left">179</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg219" style="text-align: left">219</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Lindisfari, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg245" style="text-align: left">245</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Lindisfarne"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Lindisfarne, or Holy Island, Monastery of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxv" style="text-align: left">xxv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg001" style="text-align: left">1</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg004" style="text-align: left">4</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg139" style="text-align: left">139</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg169" style="text-align: left">169</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg186" style="text-align: left">186</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg202" style="text-align: left">202</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg203" style="text-align: left">203</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg225" style="text-align: left">225</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg290" style="text-align: left">290</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg347" style="text-align: left">347</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Church of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiii" style="text-align: left">xxiii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg004" style="text-align: left">4</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg183" style="text-align: left">183</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg192" style="text-align: left">192</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg295" style="text-align: left">295</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg302" style="text-align: left">302</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            diocese of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxv" style="text-align: left">xxv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg243" style="text-align: left">243</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg325" style="text-align: left">325</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg351" style="text-align: left">351</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg353" style="text-align: left">353</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Lindisfarne, Abbot of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Aidan" style="text-align: left">Aidan</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Guthfrid" style="text-align: left">Guthfrid</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Lindisfarne, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Aidan" style="text-align: left">Aidan</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Colman" style="text-align: left">Colman</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Conwulf" style="text-align: left">Conwulf</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Cuthbert-Lindisfarne" style="text-align: left">Cuthbert</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Eadbert-Lindisfarne" style="text-align: left">Eadbert</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Eadfrid-Lindisfarne" style="text-align: left">Eadfrid</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Eata" style="text-align: left">Eata</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ethelwald-Melrose" style="text-align: left">Ethelwald</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Finan" style="text-align: left">Finan</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Tuda" style="text-align: left">Tuda</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Lindsey, history, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxv" style="text-align: left">xxv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg003" style="text-align: left">3</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg004" style="text-align: left">4</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg157" style="text-align: left">157</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg191" style="text-align: left">191</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg207" style="text-align: left">207</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg243" style="text-align: left">243</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg244" style="text-align: left">244</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg267" style="text-align: left">267</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg353" style="text-align: left">353</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            diocese of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg225" style="text-align: left">225</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg243" style="text-align: left">243</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg380" style="text-align: left">380</a> n.
          </div>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page423">[pg 423]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg423"/>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Lindsey, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Alwic" style="text-align: left">Alwic</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ceadda" style="text-align: left">Ceadda</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Cynibert-Lindsey" style="text-align: left">Cynibert</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Diuma" style="text-align: left">Diuma</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Eadhaed" style="text-align: left">Eadhaed</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Edgar" style="text-align: left">Edgar</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ethelwin" style="text-align: left">Ethelwin</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Linlithgow, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg032" style="text-align: left">32</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg189" style="text-align: left">189</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Littleborough, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg123" style="text-align: left">123</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Liudhard"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Liudhard, Bishop, Chaplain to Bertha, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg046" style="text-align: left">46</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg051" style="text-align: left">51</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Loidis, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Leeds" style="text-align: left">Leeds</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Lombards, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg148" style="text-align: left">148</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            King of the, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Perctarit" style="text-align: left">Perctarit</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-London"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            London, metropolis of the East Saxons, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg089" style="text-align: left">89</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg241" style="text-align: left">241</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            diocese of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg049" style="text-align: left">49</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg065" style="text-align: left">65</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg183" style="text-align: left">183</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            London, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Earconwald" style="text-align: left">Earconwald</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ingwald" style="text-align: left">Ingwald</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Mellitus" style="text-align: left">Mellitus</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Waldhere" style="text-align: left">Waldhere</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Wini" style="text-align: left">Wini</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Looking-glass, sent by Pope Boniface to Queen Ethelberg, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg111" style="text-align: left">111</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Lord's Day, the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg197" style="text-align: left">197</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Lothians, the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg189" style="text-align: left">189</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Louth, County, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg204" style="text-align: left">204</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Lucius-Britain"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Lucius, King of Britain, his conversion, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiii" style="text-align: left">xxiii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg012" style="text-align: left">12</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg149" style="text-align: left">149</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg382" style="text-align: left">382</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Lucius Bibulus, Consul, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg009" style="text-align: left">9</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Lucius Verus, Emperor, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Aurelius" style="text-align: left">Aurelius</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Lugubalia, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Carlisle" style="text-align: left">Carlisle</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Luke, St., quoted, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg078" style="text-align: left">78</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Lul"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Lul, Archbishop of Mainz, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg392" style="text-align: left">392</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Lupus"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Lupus, Bishop of Troyes, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg040" style="text-align: left">40</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            sent to Britain to confute the Pelagians, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiii" style="text-align: left">xxiii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg032" style="text-align: left">32</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg033" style="text-align: left">33</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg034" style="text-align: left">34</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            churches dedicated to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg033" style="text-align: left">33</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            casts out evil spirits, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg034" style="text-align: left">34</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Luxeuil, Monastery of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg092" style="text-align: left">92</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Lyccidfelth, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Lichfield" style="text-align: left">Lichfield</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Lyons, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg194" style="text-align: left">194</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg316" style="text-align: left">316</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Lyons, Archbishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Aetherius" style="text-align: left">Aetherius</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Annemundus" style="text-align: left">Annemundus</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Godwin" style="text-align: left">Godwin</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Lyons, Count of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Dalfinus-Count" style="text-align: left">Dalfinus</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Maas, the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg317" style="text-align: left">317</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Maban"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Maban, or Mafa, a teacher of Church music, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg358" style="text-align: left">358</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Macedonia, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg006" style="text-align: left">6</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Macedonius"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Macedonius, Heretic Bishop of Constantinople, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg255" style="text-align: left">255</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg256" style="text-align: left">256</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Maelduib, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Maildufus" style="text-align: left">Maildufus</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Maeldum, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Meaux" style="text-align: left">Meaux</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Maelmin, Northumbria, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg120" style="text-align: left">120</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Maestricht, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg177" style="text-align: left">177</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Maes-y-Garmon, or Field of Germanus, said to be the scene of the
            Hallelujah Victory, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg038" style="text-align: left">38</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Mafa, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Maban" style="text-align: left">Maban</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Mageo, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Mayo" style="text-align: left">Mayo</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Maildufus"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Maildufus, or Maelduib founds the Monastery of Malmesbury,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg343" style="text-align: left">343</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg344" style="text-align: left">344</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Mailros, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Melrose" style="text-align: left">Melrose</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Maintz, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Boniface-Bertgils" style="text-align: left">Boniface</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Redger" style="text-align: left">Redger</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Lul" style="text-align: left">Lul</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Making of
            England, The,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Green" style="text-align: left">Green</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Malachi, quoted, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg367" style="text-align: left">367</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Malmesbury, or City of Maildufus, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg343" style="text-align: left">343</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg344" style="text-align: left">344</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            perhaps Augustine's Ác, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg084" style="text-align: left">84</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Malmesbury, Abbot of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Aldhelm" style="text-align: left">Aldhelm</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Malmesbury, William of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-William" style="text-align: left">William</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Mamre, Hill of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg342" style="text-align: left">342</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Man, Isle of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg094" style="text-align: left">94</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg102" style="text-align: left">102</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            and <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Mevanian" style="text-align: left">Mevanian Islands</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Mandubracius, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Androgius" style="text-align: left">Androgius</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Marcellinus, his <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Life of Suidbert,”</span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg323" style="text-align: left">323</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Marcian, Emperor, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg029" style="text-align: left">29</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg041" style="text-align: left">41</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg383" style="text-align: left">383</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Marcus, Emperor in Britain, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg022" style="text-align: left">22</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Marcus Antoninus Verus, or Marcus Aurelius, Emperor, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg012" style="text-align: left">12</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Marigena, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Pelagius" style="text-align: left">Pelagius</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Mark, St., quoted, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg110" style="text-align: left">110</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his observance of Easter, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg364" style="text-align: left">364</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Market Weighton, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg118" style="text-align: left">118</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Maro (Vergil), <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg264" style="text-align: left">264</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Marriage, of the lower clergy, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg050" style="text-align: left">50</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            lawful and unlawful, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg052" style="text-align: left">52</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg053" style="text-align: left">53</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg095" style="text-align: left">95</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg097" style="text-align: left">97</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg184" style="text-align: left">184</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            customs of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg054" style="text-align: left">54</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            rules and discipline of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg056" style="text-align: left">56</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg057" style="text-align: left">57</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg059" style="text-align: left">59</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg060" style="text-align: left">60</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg061" style="text-align: left">61</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg230" style="text-align: left">230</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Marseilles, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg215" style="text-align: left">215</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Martial, editorial reference to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg264" style="text-align: left">264</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Martin-Tours"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Martin, St., Bishop of Tours, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg048" style="text-align: left">48</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg141" style="text-align: left">141</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg257" style="text-align: left">257</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg259" style="text-align: left">259</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Martin, Pope, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg256" style="text-align: left">256</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg258" style="text-align: left">258</a>.
          </div>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page424">[pg 424]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg424"/>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Martyrium Church at Jerusalem, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg339" style="text-align: left">339</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg340" style="text-align: left">340</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Martyrology,”</span> Bede's, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Bede" style="text-align: left">Bede</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Martyrs, Church of the Four Crowned, Canterbury, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg099" style="text-align: left">99</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Mary, the Virgin, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg264" style="text-align: left">264</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg266" style="text-align: left">266</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg355" style="text-align: left">355</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            churches of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg224" style="text-align: left">224</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg339" style="text-align: left">339</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Maserfelth, Battle of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg154" style="text-align: left">154</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg155" style="text-align: left">155</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Masses, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg051" style="text-align: left">51</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg081" style="text-align: left">81</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg096" style="text-align: left">96</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg268" style="text-align: left">268</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg269" style="text-align: left">269</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg270" style="text-align: left">270</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            and <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Communion" style="text-align: left">Communion</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Mason"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Mason, Dr., his <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Mission of St. Augustine,”</span> editorial
            references to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgvi" style="text-align: left">vi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg045" style="text-align: left">45</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Matthew, St., quoted, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg100" style="text-align: left">100</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg101" style="text-align: left">101</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg110" style="text-align: left">110</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg126" style="text-align: left">126</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg127" style="text-align: left">127</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg173" style="text-align: left">173</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg200" style="text-align: left">200</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg211" style="text-align: left">211</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg371" style="text-align: left">371</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg393" style="text-align: left">393</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Matthew of Westminster, editorial reference to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg345" style="text-align: left">345</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Maurice, or Mauritius, Emperor, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg042" style="text-align: left">42</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg043" style="text-align: left">43</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg044" style="text-align: left">44</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg064" style="text-align: left">64</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg066" style="text-align: left">66</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg068" style="text-align: left">68</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg071" style="text-align: left">71</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg072" style="text-align: left">72</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg081" style="text-align: left">81</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Maximian, surnamed Herculius, Emperor, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg013" style="text-align: left">13</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg014" style="text-align: left">14</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Maximus, Emperor in Britain, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg020" style="text-align: left">20</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg382" style="text-align: left">382</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Mayo"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Mayo, Mageo or Muigeo, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg225" style="text-align: left">225</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg226" style="text-align: left">226</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Mayor and Lumby's edition of Books III and IV of the <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Ecclesiastical
            History,”</span> editorial references to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgvi" style="text-align: left">vi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxx" style="text-align: left">xx</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxv" style="text-align: left">xxxv</a>
            n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg220" style="text-align: left">220</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg261" style="text-align: left">261</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Mayor of the Palace, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ebroin" style="text-align: left">Ebroin</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ercinwald" style="text-align: left">Ercinwald</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Meanware, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg245" style="text-align: left">245</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Meaux"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Meaux, or Maeldum, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg355" style="text-align: left">355</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Meaux, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Faro" style="text-align: left">Faro</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Medeshamstead, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Peterborough" style="text-align: left">Peterborough</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Medeshamstead, Abbot of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Cuthbald-Medeshamstead" style="text-align: left">Cuthbald</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Meilochon, father of Bridius, King of the Picts, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg142" style="text-align: left">142</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Meldi, the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg215" style="text-align: left">215</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Melfont, or Mellifont, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg204" style="text-align: left">204</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Mellitus"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Mellitus, Bishop of London and afterwards Archbishop of
            Canterbury, sent by Gregory to Augustine, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxiv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg064" style="text-align: left">64</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg066" style="text-align: left">66</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg089" style="text-align: left">89</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg092" style="text-align: left">92</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg231" style="text-align: left">231</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg383" style="text-align: left">383</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            account of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg064" style="text-align: left">64</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            goes to Rome, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg092" style="text-align: left">92</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg093" style="text-align: left">93</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            expelled by the East Saxons, takes refuge with Justus in Gaul,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg096" style="text-align: left">96</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg097" style="text-align: left">97</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg182" style="text-align: left">182</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            returns from Gaul, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg098" style="text-align: left">98</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            succeeds Laurentius as Archbishop of Canterbury, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg098" style="text-align: left">98</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg099" style="text-align: left">99</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            suffers from gout, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg098" style="text-align: left">98</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death and burial, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg099" style="text-align: left">99</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg100" style="text-align: left">100</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his character, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg098" style="text-align: left">98</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg099" style="text-align: left">99</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Melrose"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Melrose, or Mailros, Monastery of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg194" style="text-align: left">194</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg202" style="text-align: left">202</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg288" style="text-align: left">288</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg290" style="text-align: left">290</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg318" style="text-align: left">318</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg326" style="text-align: left">326</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Melrose, Abbot of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Eata" style="text-align: left">Eata</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ethelwald-Melrose" style="text-align: left">Ethelwald</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Provost of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Boisil" style="text-align: left">Boisil</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Menapia, Belgium, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg013" style="text-align: left">13</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Meon, East and West, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg245" style="text-align: left">245</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Meonstoke, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg245" style="text-align: left">245</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Mercia, history of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvii" style="text-align: left">xxvii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxix" style="text-align: left">xxix</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxx" style="text-align: left">xxx</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg003" style="text-align: left">3</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg045" style="text-align: left">45</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg115" style="text-align: left">115</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg122" style="text-align: left">122</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg163" style="text-align: left">163</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg172" style="text-align: left">172</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg179" style="text-align: left">179</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg226" style="text-align: left">226</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg323" style="text-align: left">323</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg352" style="text-align: left">352</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg353" style="text-align: left">353</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg379" style="text-align: left">379</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg380" style="text-align: left">380</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg385" style="text-align: left">385</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            its conversion, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvii" style="text-align: left">xxvii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxviii" style="text-align: left">xxviii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg177" style="text-align: left">177</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg190" style="text-align: left">190</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg384" style="text-align: left">384</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            diocese of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg148" style="text-align: left">148</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg218" style="text-align: left">218</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg219" style="text-align: left">219</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg243" style="text-align: left">243</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg244" style="text-align: left">244</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg272" style="text-align: left">272</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg273" style="text-align: left">273</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg379" style="text-align: left">379</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg380" style="text-align: left">380</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Mercia, King of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Beornred" style="text-align: left">Beornred</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Cearl" style="text-align: left">Cearl</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ceolred" style="text-align: left">Ceolred</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Coenred-Coinred" style="text-align: left">Coenred</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ethelbald" style="text-align: left">Ethelbald</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ethelred" style="text-align: left">Ethelred</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Offa-Mercia" style="text-align: left">Offa</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Penda" style="text-align: left">Penda</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Wulfhere" style="text-align: left">Wulfhere</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Mercia, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Aldwin-Worr" style="text-align: left">Aldwin</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ceadda" style="text-align: left">Ceadda</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Jaruman" style="text-align: left">Jaruman</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Sexwulf" style="text-align: left">Sexwulf</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Wilfrid-St" style="text-align: left">Wilfrid</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Wynfrid" style="text-align: left">Wynfrid</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">and see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Mid-Anglia" style="text-align: left">Mid-Anglia</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Mercians, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg030" style="text-align: left">30</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Merivale, editorial reference to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg018" style="text-align: left">18</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Metals of Britain, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg006" style="text-align: left">6</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Metrical Art, the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg217" style="text-align: left">217</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Mevanian"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Mevanian Islands (Man and Anglesea), conquered by Edwin, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg094" style="text-align: left">94</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg102" style="text-align: left">102</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Michael, the Archangel, appears to Wilfrid in a dream, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg355" style="text-align: left">355</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Mid-Anglia"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Mid-Anglia, conversion of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvii" style="text-align: left">xxvii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg030" style="text-align: left">30</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg179" style="text-align: left">179</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg181" style="text-align: left">181</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg384" style="text-align: left">384</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Mid-Anglia and Mercia, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Diuma" style="text-align: left">Diuma</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ceollach" style="text-align: left">Ceollach</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Trumhere" style="text-align: left">Trumhere</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Middlesex, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg010" style="text-align: left">10</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Milan, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg132" style="text-align: left">132</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Milan, Archbishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Asterius-Genoa" style="text-align: left">Asterius</a>.
          </div>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page425">[pg 425]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg425"/>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Millfield (perhaps Maelmin), <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg120" style="text-align: left">120</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Miracles, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxix" style="text-align: left">xxix</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxix" style="text-align: left">xxxix</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg232" style="text-align: left">232</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg233" style="text-align: left">233</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg237" style="text-align: left">237</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg238" style="text-align: left">238</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg268" style="text-align: left">268</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg269" style="text-align: left">269</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg270" style="text-align: left">270</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg325" style="text-align: left">325</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            of Aidan, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg167" style="text-align: left">167</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            of Augustine, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg081" style="text-align: left">81</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg083" style="text-align: left">83</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            of Cedd, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg187" style="text-align: left">187</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            of Cuthbert, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg291" style="text-align: left">291</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg292" style="text-align: left">292</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg297" style="text-align: left">297</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg300" style="text-align: left">300</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            of Earcongota, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg152" style="text-align: left">152</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg153" style="text-align: left">153</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            of Earconwald, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg232" style="text-align: left">232</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            of Ethelthryth, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg262" style="text-align: left">262</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg263" style="text-align: left">263</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            of Ethelwald, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg301" style="text-align: left">301</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg302" style="text-align: left">302</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            of Haedde, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg343" style="text-align: left">343</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            of the Hewalds, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg322" style="text-align: left">322</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            of John of Beverley, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg302" style="text-align: left">302-311</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            of Oswald, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg136" style="text-align: left">136</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg137" style="text-align: left">137</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg138" style="text-align: left">138</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg154" style="text-align: left">154-160</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg162" style="text-align: left">162</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg163" style="text-align: left">163</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg248" style="text-align: left">248</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg249" style="text-align: left">249</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg250" style="text-align: left">250</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            of Paulinus, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg122" style="text-align: left">122</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            of Sebbi, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg240" style="text-align: left">240</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Miracles, Gregory on, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg068" style="text-align: left">68</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg069" style="text-align: left">69</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Mission of St.
            Augustine,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Mason" style="text-align: left">Mason</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Moberly, his edition of the <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Ecclesiastical History,”</span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxx" style="text-align: left">xx</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Moinenn, name for Ninias, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg141" style="text-align: left">141</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Moll"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Moll, King of Northumbria, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg393" style="text-align: left">393</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Monasteries, in England, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg151" style="text-align: left">151</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            in Gaul, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg151" style="text-align: left">151</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            double or mixed, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg151" style="text-align: left">151</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg177" style="text-align: left">177</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg190" style="text-align: left">190</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg233" style="text-align: left">233</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg260" style="text-align: left">260</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg273" style="text-align: left">273</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg283" style="text-align: left">283</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg284" style="text-align: left">284</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            rules for, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg229" style="text-align: left">229</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            constitution of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg142" style="text-align: left">142</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            hereditary succession in, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg306" style="text-align: left">306</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Monasticon,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Dugdale" style="text-align: left">Dugdale</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Monk, an ungodly, his wicked life and miserable death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg334" style="text-align: left">334</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg335" style="text-align: left">335</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his visions of hell, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg335" style="text-align: left">335</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Monophysite Heresy, the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg254" style="text-align: left">254</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Monothelitism, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxix" style="text-align: left">xxix</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg214" style="text-align: left">214</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg254" style="text-align: left">254</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg258" style="text-align: left">258</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg352" style="text-align: left">352</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Monumenta
            Historica Britannica,”</span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxx" style="text-align: left">xx</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Moore, Bishop, his MS. of the <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Ecclesiastical History,”</span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxix" style="text-align: left">xix</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxx" style="text-align: left">xx</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Moray Frith, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg360" style="text-align: left">360</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Mopsuestia, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Theodore-Theodorus" style="text-align: left">Theodore</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Morgan, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Pelagius" style="text-align: left">Pelagius</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Morini, The, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg005" style="text-align: left">5</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg009" style="text-align: left">9</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Mosaic Law, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg196" style="text-align: left">196</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg198" style="text-align: left">198</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg361" style="text-align: left">361</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Mount-Olives"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Mount of Olives, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg340" style="text-align: left">340</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg341" style="text-align: left">341</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Mount Sion, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg340" style="text-align: left">340</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Muigeo, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Mayo" style="text-align: left">Mayo</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Mul"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Mul, usurper in Kent, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg287" style="text-align: left">287</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Music, Church, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg133" style="text-align: left">133</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg217" style="text-align: left">217</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg218" style="text-align: left">218</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg258" style="text-align: left">258</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg265" style="text-align: left">265</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg358" style="text-align: left">358</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg386" style="text-align: left">386</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            supernatural, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg221" style="text-align: left">221</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Naiton"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Naiton, or Nechtan mac Derili, King of the Picts, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxx" style="text-align: left">xxx</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxi" style="text-align: left">xxxi</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            adopts Catholic usages, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg359" style="text-align: left">359</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg360" style="text-align: left">360</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg374" style="text-align: left">374</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            asks Ceolfrid for advice and builders, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg359" style="text-align: left">359</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            builds a stone church, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg359" style="text-align: left">359</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            expels the Columban clergy, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg359" style="text-align: left">359</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            receives Ceolfrid's letter, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg374" style="text-align: left">374</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Namur MS. of the <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Ecclesiastical History,”</span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxix" style="text-align: left">xix</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Naples, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg214" style="text-align: left">214</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Nativity of our Lord, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Christmas" style="text-align: left">Christmas</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Nechtan mac Derili, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Naiton" style="text-align: left">Naiton</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Nechtansmere"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Nechtansmere, or Dunnechtan, battle of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg285" style="text-align: left">285</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Nendrum, or Inishmahee, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Cromanus" style="text-align: left">Cromanus</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Nennius, editorial references to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg023" style="text-align: left">23</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg147" style="text-align: left">147</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg188" style="text-align: left">188</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg189" style="text-align: left">189</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg391" style="text-align: left">391</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Nero, Emperor, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg011" style="text-align: left">11</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg014" style="text-align: left">14</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Nestorius"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Nestorius, Bishop of Constantinople, his heresy, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg255" style="text-align: left">255</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg256" style="text-align: left">256</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Neustria, King of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Chilperic" style="text-align: left">Chilperic</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Clothaire-III" style="text-align: left">Clothaire III</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Clovis-II" style="text-align: left">Clovis II</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Neustrians defeated by Pippin, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg320" style="text-align: left">320</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Newark, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg123" style="text-align: left">123</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Newcastle, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg180" style="text-align: left">180</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Nicaea, Council of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg019" style="text-align: left">19</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg128" style="text-align: left">128</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg198" style="text-align: left">198</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg227" style="text-align: left">227</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg255" style="text-align: left">255</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg369" style="text-align: left">369</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Nicene Creed, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg256" style="text-align: left">256</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Nidd, Synod of the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg356" style="text-align: left">356</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg385" style="text-align: left">385</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Ninian"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ninian, Ninias or Moinenn, Bishop of Whitern, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg048" style="text-align: left">48</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg141" style="text-align: left">141</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his mission to the Southern Picts, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg141" style="text-align: left">141</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Niridanum, monastery of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg214" style="text-align: left">214</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Nisan, the month, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg084" style="text-align: left">84</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg365" style="text-align: left">365</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Nivelles, monastery of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg177" style="text-align: left">177</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Nola, Campania, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg388" style="text-align: left">388</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Nola, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Paulinus-Nola" style="text-align: left">Paulinus</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Norfolk, Bishopric of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg231" style="text-align: left">231</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Norman
            Conquest, The,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Freeman" style="text-align: left">Freeman</a>.
          </div>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page426">[pg 426]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg426"/>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Northamptonshire, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg179" style="text-align: left">179</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg180" style="text-align: left">180</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg268" style="text-align: left">268</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg346" style="text-align: left">346</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-North-Burton"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            North Burton, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg308" style="text-align: left">308</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            North Pole, the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg006" style="text-align: left">6</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Northumberland, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg004" style="text-align: left">4</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg292" style="text-align: left">292</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Northumbria, Bede's acquaintance with its history, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxii" style="text-align: left">xxii</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiii" style="text-align: left">xxiii</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            history of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxiv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxv" style="text-align: left">xxv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvii" style="text-align: left">xxvii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxix" style="text-align: left">xxix</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg082" style="text-align: left">82</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg122" style="text-align: left">122</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg127" style="text-align: left">127</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg131" style="text-align: left">131</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg164" style="text-align: left">164</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg168" style="text-align: left">168</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg185" style="text-align: left">185</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg190" style="text-align: left">190</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg195" style="text-align: left">195</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg204" style="text-align: left">204</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg226" style="text-align: left">226</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg286" style="text-align: left">286</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg325" style="text-align: left">325</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg352" style="text-align: left">352</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg380" style="text-align: left">380</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg393" style="text-align: left">393</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            establishment of Christianity in, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxiv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxv" style="text-align: left">xxv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg102" style="text-align: left">102</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg104" style="text-align: left">104</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg117" style="text-align: left">117</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg118" style="text-align: left">118</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg119" style="text-align: left">119</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg120" style="text-align: left">120</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg132" style="text-align: left">132</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg133" style="text-align: left">133</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg139" style="text-align: left">139</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg381" style="text-align: left">381</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            diocese of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvii" style="text-align: left">xxvii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxix" style="text-align: left">xxix</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg003" style="text-align: left">3</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg004" style="text-align: left">4</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg137" style="text-align: left">137</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg219" style="text-align: left">219</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg242" style="text-align: left">242</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg351" style="text-align: left">351</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg379" style="text-align: left">379</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg381" style="text-align: left">381</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Northumbria, King of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Aldfrid" style="text-align: left">Aldfrid</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Alfrid" style="text-align: left"><span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Alfrid,”</span></a> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Aluchred" style="text-align: left">Aluchred</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ceolwulf" style="text-align: left">Ceolwulf</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Coenred-Northumbria" style="text-align: left">Coenred</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Eadbert-Northumbria" style="text-align: left">Eadbert</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Eadwulf" style="text-align: left">Eadwulf</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Edwin" style="text-align: left">Edwin</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Egfrid" style="text-align: left">Egfrid</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ethelfrid" style="text-align: left">Ethelfrid</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ethelwald-Northumbria" style="text-align: left">Ethelwald</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Moll" style="text-align: left">Moll</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Osred" style="text-align: left">Osred</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Osric-Northumbria" style="text-align: left">Osric</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Oswald" style="text-align: left">Oswald</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Oswulf" style="text-align: left">Oswulf</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Oswy" style="text-align: left">Oswy</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Northumbria, Bishop of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg143" style="text-align: left">143</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            and <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span>
            Bishops of <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Lindisfarne" style="text-align: left">Lindisfarne</a> and <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-York" style="text-align: left">York</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Northumbrians, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg030" style="text-align: left">30</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            North Wales, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg086" style="text-align: left">86</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Norwich, the diocese of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg122" style="text-align: left">122</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg231" style="text-align: left">231</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Nothelm"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Nothelm, Archbishop of Canterbury, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxii" style="text-align: left">xxii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg002" style="text-align: left">2</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg390" style="text-align: left">390</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his research, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxii" style="text-align: left">xxii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg002" style="text-align: left">2</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his questions to Bede answered, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg387" style="text-align: left">387</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg391" style="text-align: left">391</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Nottinghamshire, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg115" style="text-align: left">115</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Numbers, quoted, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg362" style="text-align: left">362</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Oak, the (possibly Augustine's Ác), <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg084" style="text-align: left">84</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Octa"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Octa, grandfather of Ethelbert, King of Kent, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg095" style="text-align: left">95</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Oder, the river, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg317" style="text-align: left">317</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Odo, Archbishop of Canterbury, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg346" style="text-align: left">346</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Oecumenical Councils, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Councils" style="text-align: left">Councils</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Oengus"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Oengus, Angus or Ungust, King of the Picts, son of Fergus,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg392" style="text-align: left">392</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg393" style="text-align: left">393</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Oeric"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Oeric, Oisc, son of Hengist, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg095" style="text-align: left">95</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Offa-Essex"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Offa, King of Essex, son of Sighere, his abdication and
            pilgrimage to Rome, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxx" style="text-align: left">xxx</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg345" style="text-align: left">345</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg346" style="text-align: left">346</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Offa-Mercia"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Offa, King of Mercia, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg018" style="text-align: left">18</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg219" style="text-align: left">219</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg392" style="text-align: left">392</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Offerings at the Altar, divisions of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg049" style="text-align: left">49</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg050" style="text-align: left">50</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Oftfor"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Oftfor, Bishop of Worcester, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg273" style="text-align: left">273</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg274" style="text-align: left">274</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg380" style="text-align: left">380</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Oiddi, a priest of Wilfrid's, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg245" style="text-align: left">245</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Oidilwald"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Oidilwald, sub-king of Deira, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ethelwald-Deira" style="text-align: left">Ethelwald</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Oil calms a storm, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg167" style="text-align: left">167</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Oisc, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Oeric" style="text-align: left">Oeric</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Oiscings, the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg094" style="text-align: left">94</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Olivet, Mount, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Mount-Olives" style="text-align: left">Mount of Olives</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Old Saxons, The, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg317" style="text-align: left">317</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg320" style="text-align: left">320</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg321" style="text-align: left">321</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg322" style="text-align: left">322</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Old Sarum, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg343" style="text-align: left">343</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Opus Paschale, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Sedulius" style="text-align: left">Sedulius</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Orcades, The, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Orkneys" style="text-align: left">Orkneys</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ordination of bishops, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg049" style="text-align: left">49</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg050" style="text-align: left">50</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg053" style="text-align: left">53</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg054" style="text-align: left">54</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Orkneys"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Orkneys, The, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg005" style="text-align: left">5</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg011" style="text-align: left">11</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg142" style="text-align: left">142</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg382" style="text-align: left">382</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Orosius, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxii" style="text-align: left">xxii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg005" style="text-align: left">5</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg025" style="text-align: left">25</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Orthography, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg389" style="text-align: left">389</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Osfrid, son of Edwin, baptized, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg119" style="text-align: left">119</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            slain in battle, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg131" style="text-align: left">131</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his son, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg132" style="text-align: left">132</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Osred"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Osred, King of Northumbria, after Aldfrid, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxx" style="text-align: left">xxx</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg342" style="text-align: left">342</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg345" style="text-align: left">345</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg346" style="text-align: left">346</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg356" style="text-align: left">356</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg357" style="text-align: left">357</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg377" style="text-align: left">377</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg385" style="text-align: left">385</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            besieged in Bamborough by Eadwulf, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg385" style="text-align: left">385</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            killed in battle, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg375" style="text-align: left">375</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg386" style="text-align: left">386</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Osric-Hwiccas"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Osric, sub-king of the Hwiccas, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg273" style="text-align: left">273</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Osric-Deira"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Osric, King of Deira after Edwin, son of Aelfric, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg134" style="text-align: left">134</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg135" style="text-align: left">135</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg164" style="text-align: left">164</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Osric-Northumbria"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Osric, King of Northumbria after Coenred, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxi" style="text-align: left">xxxi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg001" style="text-align: left">1</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg273" style="text-align: left">273</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg375" style="text-align: left">375</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg377" style="text-align: left">377</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his parentage, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg377" style="text-align: left">377</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg378" style="text-align: left">378</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg386" style="text-align: left">386</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Osthryth, daughter of Oswy, wife of Ethelred, King of Mercia,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg157" style="text-align: left">157</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg267" style="text-align: left">267</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg352" style="text-align: left">352</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            her love for Bardney Monastery, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg157" style="text-align: left">157</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg158" style="text-align: left">158</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            murdered by her nobles, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg385" style="text-align: left">385</a>.
          </div>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page427">[pg 427]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg427"/>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Oswald"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Oswald, King of Northumbria after Eanfrid and Osric, and sixth
            Bretwalda, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxv" style="text-align: left">xxv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg094" style="text-align: left">94</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg131" style="text-align: left">131</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg132" style="text-align: left">132</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg135" style="text-align: left">135</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg185" style="text-align: left">185</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg189" style="text-align: left">189</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg243" style="text-align: left">243</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            unites Bernicia and Deira, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg134" style="text-align: left">134</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg164" style="text-align: left">164</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg383" style="text-align: left">383</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            extent of his dominions, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg146" style="text-align: left">146</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his mother, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg147" style="text-align: left">147</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his victory over Caedwalla at Hefenfelth, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxv" style="text-align: left">xxv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg135" style="text-align: left">135</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            erects a cross at Hefenfelth, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg136" style="text-align: left">136</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            invites Aidan to restore Northumbria to Christianity, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxv" style="text-align: left">xxv</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg134" style="text-align: left">134</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg138" style="text-align: left">138</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg145" style="text-align: left">145</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            baptized, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg138" style="text-align: left">138</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            appoints Aidan Bishop of Lindisfarne, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg138" style="text-align: left">138</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg139" style="text-align: left">139</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his relations with Cynegils, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg148" style="text-align: left">148</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            marries Cynegils' daughter, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg148" style="text-align: left">148</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            makes Birinus Bishop of Dorchester, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg148" style="text-align: left">148</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            finishes building St. Peter's, York, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg119" style="text-align: left">119</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his piety, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg136" style="text-align: left">136</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg146" style="text-align: left">146</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg147" style="text-align: left">147</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg154" style="text-align: left">154</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg160" style="text-align: left">160</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            church built in his honour, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg137" style="text-align: left">137</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            length of his reign, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg135" style="text-align: left">135</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg154" style="text-align: left">154</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            slain at Maserfelth, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg137" style="text-align: left">137</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg154" style="text-align: left">154</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg160" style="text-align: left">160</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg163" style="text-align: left">163</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg164" style="text-align: left">164</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg384" style="text-align: left">384</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            burial and translation of his remains, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg157" style="text-align: left">157</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg158" style="text-align: left">158</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg160" style="text-align: left">160</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg161" style="text-align: left">161</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his arms miraculously preserved from corruption, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg147" style="text-align: left">147</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his posthumous miracles, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg154" style="text-align: left">154</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg155" style="text-align: left">155</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg156" style="text-align: left">156</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg157" style="text-align: left">157</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg158" style="text-align: left">158</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg159" style="text-align: left">159</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg160" style="text-align: left">160</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg161" style="text-align: left">161</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg162" style="text-align: left">162</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            averts a pestilence by his posthumous prayers, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg248" style="text-align: left">248</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg249" style="text-align: left">249</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg250" style="text-align: left">250</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            legend connected with his name, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg154" style="text-align: left">154</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            the day of his death celebrated, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg250" style="text-align: left">250</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg251" style="text-align: left">251</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Life
            of,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Reginald" style="text-align: left">Reginald</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Oswalds-Tree"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Oswald's Tree, Oswestry, or Croes Oswallt (Cross Oswald),
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg154" style="text-align: left">154</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Oswin-Deira"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Oswin, King of Deira, son of Osric, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg164" style="text-align: left">164</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg181" style="text-align: left">181</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg185" style="text-align: left">185</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his love for Aidan, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg165" style="text-align: left">165</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg166" style="text-align: left">166</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his character and appearance, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg164" style="text-align: left">164</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg165" style="text-align: left">165</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg166" style="text-align: left">166</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his reign, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg164" style="text-align: left">164</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            murdered by Oswy, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg164" style="text-align: left">164</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg166" style="text-align: left">166</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg191" style="text-align: left">191</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg384" style="text-align: left">384</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            monastery built in his memory, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg165" style="text-align: left">165</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Oswin, an Aetheling, killed by Moll, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg393" style="text-align: left">393</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Oswinthorp, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg120" style="text-align: left">120</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Oswulf"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Oswulf, King of Northumbria, son of Eadbert, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg393" style="text-align: left">393</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Oswy"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Oswy, King of Bernicia and afterwards of Northumbria, seventh
            Bretwalda, son of Ethelfrid, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvii" style="text-align: left">xxvii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxviii" style="text-align: left">xxviii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg094" style="text-align: left">94</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg157" style="text-align: left">157</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg179" style="text-align: left">179</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg201" style="text-align: left">201</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg218" style="text-align: left">218</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg224" style="text-align: left">224</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg257" style="text-align: left">257</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg260" style="text-align: left">260</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg287" style="text-align: left">287</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg377" style="text-align: left">377</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            murders Oswin, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg163" style="text-align: left">163</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg164" style="text-align: left">164</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            buries Oswald's head and arms, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg160" style="text-align: left">160</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg161" style="text-align: left">161</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his reign, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg163" style="text-align: left">163</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his dominions, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg218" style="text-align: left">218</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg219" style="text-align: left">219</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            attacks upon him, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg163" style="text-align: left">163</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his struggle with and defeat of Penda of Mercia, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg181" style="text-align: left">181</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg188" style="text-align: left">188</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg189" style="text-align: left">189</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg190" style="text-align: left">190</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg191" style="text-align: left">191</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg243" style="text-align: left">243</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            marries Eanfled, daughter of Edwin, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg167" style="text-align: left">167</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            dedicates his daughter Elfled to a religious life, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxiii" style="text-align: left">xxxiii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg188" style="text-align: left">188</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg189" style="text-align: left">189</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his daughter Alchfled married to Peada, son of Penda, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg180" style="text-align: left">180</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg191" style="text-align: left">191</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            sends Cedd to convert the East Saxons, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg182" style="text-align: left">182</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg183" style="text-align: left">183</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            endows monasteries, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg188" style="text-align: left">188</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg189" style="text-align: left">189</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg190" style="text-align: left">190</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg191" style="text-align: left">191</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            instructed by the Scots, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg194" style="text-align: left">194</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            converted to Catholic usages, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg200" style="text-align: left">200</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg201" style="text-align: left">201</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg226" style="text-align: left">226</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            at the Whitby Synod, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg195" style="text-align: left">195</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg200" style="text-align: left">200</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg201" style="text-align: left">201</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            at Lindisfarne, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg202" style="text-align: left">202</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg203" style="text-align: left">203</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            sends Ceadda into Kent, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg207" style="text-align: left">207</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his conference with Egbert, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg208" style="text-align: left">208</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            sends Wighard to Rome, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg208" style="text-align: left">208</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg213" style="text-align: left">213</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his treatment of Wilfrid, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg350" style="text-align: left">350</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg351" style="text-align: left">351</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Pope Vitalian's letter to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg208" style="text-align: left">208</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg209" style="text-align: left">209</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg210" style="text-align: left">210</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg211" style="text-align: left">211</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            intends to go to Rome, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg226" style="text-align: left">226</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg227" style="text-align: left">227</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            sickness and death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg226" style="text-align: left">226</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg384" style="text-align: left">384</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            buried at Whitby, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg190" style="text-align: left">190</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Othona, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg183" style="text-align: left">183</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Ouestraefelda"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ouestraefelda (Estrefeld), Aetswinapathe, or Edwins-path, Synod
            of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg343" style="text-align: left">343</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg353" style="text-align: left">353</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg356" style="text-align: left">356</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Oundle"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Oundle, or Inundalum, Monastery at, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg346" style="text-align: left">346</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg356" style="text-align: left">356</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Oundle, Abbot of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Cuthbald-Cudwald" style="text-align: left">Cuthbald</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ovid, editorial reference to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg264" style="text-align: left">264</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Owini, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg220" style="text-align: left">220</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg221" style="text-align: left">221</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his narrative of Ceadda's death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg221" style="text-align: left">221</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg222" style="text-align: left">222</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg223" style="text-align: left">223</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg224" style="text-align: left">224</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Oxford, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg148" style="text-align: left">148</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg260" style="text-align: left">260</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Oxford, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Paget" style="text-align: left">Paget</a>.
          </div>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page428">[pg 428]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg428"/>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Padda, a priest of Wilfrid's, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg245" style="text-align: left">245</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Paegnalaech, or Paegnalech, Monastery of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg204" style="text-align: left">204</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Paget"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Paget, Dr., Bishop of Oxford, his <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Studies in the Christian Character,”</span>
            quoted, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxviii" style="text-align: left">xxxviii</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Palestine, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg338" style="text-align: left">338</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Pall, the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg049" style="text-align: left">49</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg054" style="text-align: left">54</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg100" style="text-align: left">100</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg101" style="text-align: left">101</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg124" style="text-align: left">124</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg132" style="text-align: left">132</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg273" style="text-align: left">273</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg383" style="text-align: left">383</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg390" style="text-align: left">390</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Palladius"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Palladius, Bishop, sent by Pope Celestine to the Christian Irish,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiii" style="text-align: left">xxiii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg026" style="text-align: left">26</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg027" style="text-align: left">27</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg033" style="text-align: left">33</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg382" style="text-align: left">382</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg383" style="text-align: left">383</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Pallinsburn, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg120" style="text-align: left">120</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Palsy, girl miraculously cured of the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg155" style="text-align: left">155</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Pamphilus, Martyr, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg369" style="text-align: left">369</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Pancras, or Pancratius, St., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg210" style="text-align: left">210</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Pant, The River, afterwards the Blackwater, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg183" style="text-align: left">183</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Pantheon, The, given by Phocas to the Church, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg093" style="text-align: left">93</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Paris, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg152" style="text-align: left">152</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Paris, King of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Charibert" style="text-align: left">Charibert</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Paris, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Agilbert" style="text-align: left">Agilbert</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Importunus" style="text-align: left">Importunus</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Parker, editorial reference to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg048" style="text-align: left">48</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Parochial system, The, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg183" style="text-align: left">183</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Partney"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Partney, or Peartaneu Monastery, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg123" style="text-align: left">123</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Partney, Abbot of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Aldwin-Partney" style="text-align: left">Aldwin</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Deda" style="text-align: left">Deda</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Paschal, Pope, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg265" style="text-align: left">265</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Paschal Controversy, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Easter-Controversy" style="text-align: left">Easter</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Paschal Cycles, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Cycles" style="text-align: left">Cycles</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Passover and Easter, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg084" style="text-align: left">84</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg361" style="text-align: left">361</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg362" style="text-align: left">362</a>,
            <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">et seq.</span></span>
</div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Pastoral Care,
            The,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Gregory-Great" style="text-align: left">Gregory</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Patriarchs, The, their tonsure, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg370" style="text-align: left">370</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Patriarchs' tombs, The, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg341" style="text-align: left">341</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg342" style="text-align: left">342</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Patrick, St., Missionary to the Irish, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg027" style="text-align: left">27</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg048" style="text-align: left">48</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Paul, St., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg072" style="text-align: left">72</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg081" style="text-align: left">81</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg196" style="text-align: left">196</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg197" style="text-align: left">197</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg210" style="text-align: left">210</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg211" style="text-align: left">211</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg240" style="text-align: left">240</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg265" style="text-align: left">265</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            quoted, xli, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg060" style="text-align: left">60</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his tonsure, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg215" style="text-align: left">215</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            appears to a Saxon boy, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg248" style="text-align: left">248</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg249" style="text-align: left">249</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg250" style="text-align: left">250</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Paul a Martyr, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg210" style="text-align: left">210</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Paul the Deacon, his <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Life of Gregory,”</span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg075" style="text-align: left">75</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg083" style="text-align: left">83</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Paulinus-York"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Paulinus, Archbishop of York, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxv" style="text-align: left">xxv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg118" style="text-align: left">118</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg193" style="text-align: left">193</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg391" style="text-align: left">391</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            sent by Gregory to Augustine, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg064" style="text-align: left">64</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg383" style="text-align: left">383</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            goes to Northumbria with Queen Ethelberg, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg102" style="text-align: left">102</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg103" style="text-align: left">103</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his conversion of Edwin, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg102" style="text-align: left">102</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg104" style="text-align: left">104</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg112" style="text-align: left">112</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg115" style="text-align: left">115</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg116" style="text-align: left">116</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg270" style="text-align: left">270</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg271" style="text-align: left">271</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            converts the Northumbrians, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg103" style="text-align: left">103</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg120" style="text-align: left">120</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg124" style="text-align: left">124</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his ordination, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg103" style="text-align: left">103</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg105" style="text-align: left">105</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg384" style="text-align: left">384</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            baptizes Edwin's daughter Eanfled, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg104" style="text-align: left">104</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            teaches and baptizes in Northumbria, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg119" style="text-align: left">119</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg120" style="text-align: left">120</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            preaches in Lindsey, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg122" style="text-align: left">122</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg123" style="text-align: left">123</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            converts Blaecca of Lincoln, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg122" style="text-align: left">122</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            builds St. Paul's, Lincoln, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg122" style="text-align: left">122</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            consecrates Honorius, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg123" style="text-align: left">123</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg126" style="text-align: left">126</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his appearance, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg123" style="text-align: left">123</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            receives the pall from Pope Honorius, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg124" style="text-align: left">124</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg125" style="text-align: left">125</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            converts Osric, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg134" style="text-align: left">134</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            converts Hilda, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg270" style="text-align: left">270</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg271" style="text-align: left">271</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            on Edwin's death takes Ethelberg and her children back to Kent,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg130" style="text-align: left">130</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg131" style="text-align: left">131</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg132" style="text-align: left">132</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg384" style="text-align: left">384</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            made Bishop of Rochester, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg130" style="text-align: left">130</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg132" style="text-align: left">132</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death and burial, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg132" style="text-align: left">132</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg163" style="text-align: left">163</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg384" style="text-align: left">384</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Paulinus-Nola"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Paulinus, Bishop of Nola, his poems, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg388" style="text-align: left">388</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Peada"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Peada, son of Penda, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvii" style="text-align: left">xxvii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg231" style="text-align: left">231</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his conversion, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg179" style="text-align: left">179</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg180" style="text-align: left">180</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg384" style="text-align: left">384</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            made King of the South Mercians by Oswy, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg179" style="text-align: left">179</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg180" style="text-align: left">180</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg191" style="text-align: left">191</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his character, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg180" style="text-align: left">180</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            marries Oswy's daughter Alchfled, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg180" style="text-align: left">180</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            slain by the treachery of his wife, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg191" style="text-align: left">191</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Peanfahel, or Penneltun, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg024" style="text-align: left">24</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg025" style="text-align: left">25</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Pearls of various colours, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg005" style="text-align: left">5</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Peartaneu, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Partney" style="text-align: left">Partney</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Pechthelm"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Pechthelm, Bishop of Whitern, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg334" style="text-align: left">334</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg343" style="text-align: left">343</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg379" style="text-align: left">379</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg381" style="text-align: left">381</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Pelagians, The, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiii" style="text-align: left">xxiii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxv" style="text-align: left">xxv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg128" style="text-align: left">128</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg129" style="text-align: left">129</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg130" style="text-align: left">130</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg368" style="text-align: left">368</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            in Britain, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg021" style="text-align: left">21</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg032" style="text-align: left">32</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg039" style="text-align: left">39</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            at the conference of St. Albans, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg034" style="text-align: left">34</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg035" style="text-align: left">35</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            their teachers confuted and expelled by Germanus, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg040" style="text-align: left">40</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg041" style="text-align: left">41</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Pelagius II, Pope, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg083" style="text-align: left">83</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Pelagius"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Pelagius, the heretic, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg020" style="text-align: left">20</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg021" style="text-align: left">21</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg032" style="text-align: left">32</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg035" style="text-align: left">35</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his doctrine, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg021" style="text-align: left">21</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            refuted by St. Augustine, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg021" style="text-align: left">21</a> n.
          </div>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page429">[pg 429]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg429"/>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Penda"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Penda, King of Mercia, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxv" style="text-align: left">xxv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvii" style="text-align: left">xxvii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg179" style="text-align: left">179</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg180" style="text-align: left">180</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg190" style="text-align: left">190</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg241" style="text-align: left">241</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg380" style="text-align: left">380</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his war against Edwin, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg130" style="text-align: left">130</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg131" style="text-align: left">131</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            treacherously slays Eadfrid, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg131" style="text-align: left">131</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his attitude towards Christianity, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg131" style="text-align: left">131</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg181" style="text-align: left">181</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his sister married to and divorced by Coinwalch, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg149" style="text-align: left">149</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            deprives Coinwalch of his kingdom, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg149" style="text-align: left">149</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            kills Oswald, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg154" style="text-align: left">154</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg188" style="text-align: left">188</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            kills Sigbert and Ecgric in battle, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg172" style="text-align: left">172</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            conquers Lindsey, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg243" style="text-align: left">243</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            invades and ravages Northumbria, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg168" style="text-align: left">168</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg169" style="text-align: left">169</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg188" style="text-align: left">188</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            attempts to burn Bamborough, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg168" style="text-align: left">168</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            burns the church where Aidan died, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg170" style="text-align: left">170</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his children, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg180" style="text-align: left">180</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            slain by Oswy at the Battle of Winwaed, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg181" style="text-align: left">181</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg188" style="text-align: left">188</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg189" style="text-align: left">189</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg191" style="text-align: left">191</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg384" style="text-align: left">384</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Pentecost, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Whitsuntide" style="text-align: left">Whitsuntide</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Perctarit"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Perctarit, King of the Lombards, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg351" style="text-align: left">351</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Perrona, or Péronne, Church at, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg178" style="text-align: left">178</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Monastery of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg177" style="text-align: left">177</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg178" style="text-align: left">178</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Péronne, Abbot of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ultan" style="text-align: left">Ultan</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Persia, King of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Chosroes" style="text-align: left">Chosroes</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Peter, St., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg071" style="text-align: left">71</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg072" style="text-align: left">72</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg081" style="text-align: left">81</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg109" style="text-align: left">109</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg127" style="text-align: left">127</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg196" style="text-align: left">196</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg200" style="text-align: left">200</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg201" style="text-align: left">201</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg210" style="text-align: left">210</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg211" style="text-align: left">211</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg304" style="text-align: left">304</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg356" style="text-align: left">356</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg372" style="text-align: left">372</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg373" style="text-align: left">373</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his tomb, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg054" style="text-align: left">54</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            founds the Church of Rome, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg091" style="text-align: left">91</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            said to have consecrated Clement, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg091" style="text-align: left">91</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his observance of Easter, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg198" style="text-align: left">198</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg364" style="text-align: left">364</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            monastery dedicated to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg231" style="text-align: left">231</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            appears in a vision to a Saxon boy, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg248" style="text-align: left">248</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg249" style="text-align: left">249</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg250" style="text-align: left">250</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his wife's mother, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg308" style="text-align: left">308</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            church built by Naiton dedicated to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg360" style="text-align: left">360</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            preaching at Rome, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg364" style="text-align: left">364</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his tonsure, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg371" style="text-align: left">371</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg374" style="text-align: left">374</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Peter, Gregory's Deacon, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg076" style="text-align: left">76</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg079" style="text-align: left">79</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Peter-Augustines"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Peter, first Abbot of St. Augustine's Monastery, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg049" style="text-align: left">49</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg072" style="text-align: left">72</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg073" style="text-align: left">73</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Peter, name given to Caedwalla in his baptism, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg312" style="text-align: left">312</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg313" style="text-align: left">313</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Peterborough"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Peterborough, or Medeshamstead, Monastery founded by Sexwulf,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg231" style="text-align: left">231</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Peterborough, Abbot of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Cuthbald-Medeshamstead" style="text-align: left">Cuthbald</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Sexwulf" style="text-align: left">Sexwulf</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Phase, or Passover, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg362" style="text-align: left">362</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Philippians,
            Epistle to the,”</span> quoted, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg144" style="text-align: left">144</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Phocas, Emperor, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg042" style="text-align: left">42</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg074" style="text-align: left">74</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg081" style="text-align: left">81</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg093" style="text-align: left">93</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Phrygia, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg078" style="text-align: left">78</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Picardy, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg215" style="text-align: left">215</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Pickering, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg003" style="text-align: left">3</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Picts, the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiii" style="text-align: left">xxiii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxix" style="text-align: left">xxix</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxx" style="text-align: left">xxx</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxi" style="text-align: left">xxxi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg007" style="text-align: left">7</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg009" style="text-align: left">9</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg205" style="text-align: left">205</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg219" style="text-align: left">219</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg385" style="text-align: left">385</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg391" style="text-align: left">391</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            their law of succession, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg008" style="text-align: left">8</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            their incursions, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg007" style="text-align: left">7</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg008" style="text-align: left">8</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg020" style="text-align: left">20</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg023" style="text-align: left">23</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg026" style="text-align: left">26</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg028" style="text-align: left">28</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg030" style="text-align: left">30</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            subdued by Oswy and made subject to Northumbria, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg094" style="text-align: left">94</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg191" style="text-align: left">191</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg244" style="text-align: left">244</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg381" style="text-align: left">381</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            regain their Independence, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg244" style="text-align: left">244</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg286" style="text-align: left">286</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg381" style="text-align: left">381</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            defeat Egfrid at Nechtansmere, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg285" style="text-align: left">285</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            at peace with the English, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg381" style="text-align: left">381</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            their conversion, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg141" style="text-align: left">141</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg359" style="text-align: left">359</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg383" style="text-align: left">383</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            attitude towards Easter question, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg196" style="text-align: left">196</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg359" style="text-align: left">359</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg374" style="text-align: left">374</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Picts, King of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Bridius" style="text-align: left">Bridius</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Bruide-Mac-Bili" style="text-align: left">Bruide Mac Bili</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Naiton" style="text-align: left">Naiton</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Oengus" style="text-align: left">Oengus</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Picts, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Trumwine" style="text-align: left">Trumwine</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Pilgrimages, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg294" style="text-align: left">294</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg312" style="text-align: left">312</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg313" style="text-align: left">313</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg314" style="text-align: left">314</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg345" style="text-align: left">345</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg346" style="text-align: left">346</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg385" style="text-align: left">385</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Pilgrim of Bordeaux, The, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg340" style="text-align: left">340</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Pincahala, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg204" style="text-align: left">204</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Pippin-Heristal"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Pippin of Heristal, Duke of the Franks, account of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg320" style="text-align: left">320</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his kindness to Wilbrord, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg320" style="text-align: left">320</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg324" style="text-align: left">324</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            buries the Hewalds, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg322" style="text-align: left">322</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            gives Suidbert land for a monastery at Inlitore, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg324" style="text-align: left">324</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Pippin-Short"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Pippin the Short, King of the Franks, son of Charles Martel,
            grandson of Pippin of Heristal, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg320" style="text-align: left">320</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg391" style="text-align: left">391</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg392" style="text-align: left">392</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Placidia, Mother of Valentinian, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg041" style="text-align: left">41</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Plague, The, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvii" style="text-align: left">xxvii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxviii" style="text-align: left">xxviii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxv" style="text-align: left">xxxv</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg028" style="text-align: left">28</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg162" style="text-align: left">162</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg179" style="text-align: left">179</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg186" style="text-align: left">186</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg187" style="text-align: left">187</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg201" style="text-align: left">201</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg203" style="text-align: left">203</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg204" style="text-align: left">204</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg212" style="text-align: left">212</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg213" style="text-align: left">213</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg220" style="text-align: left">220</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg233" style="text-align: left">233</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg234" style="text-align: left">234</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg237" style="text-align: left">237</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg288" style="text-align: left">288</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg289" style="text-align: left">289</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg350" style="text-align: left">350</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg384" style="text-align: left">384</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Plato, quoted, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg360" style="text-align: left">360</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Plectrude, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Blithryda" style="text-align: left">Blithryda</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Pliny, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxii" style="text-align: left">xxii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg005" style="text-align: left">5</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Plummer"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Plummer, editorial references to his edition of the <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Ecclesiastical
            History”</span> and Historical Works of Bede, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgv" style="text-align: left">v</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxix" style="text-align: left">xix</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxx" style="text-align: left">xx</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg002" style="text-align: left">2</a> n., <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page430">[pg 430]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" style="text-align: left" id="Pg430"/> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg013" style="text-align: left">13</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg032" style="text-align: left">32</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg068" style="text-align: left">68</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg084" style="text-align: left">84</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg090" style="text-align: left">90</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg226" style="text-align: left">226</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg277" style="text-align: left">277</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg305" style="text-align: left">305</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg324" style="text-align: left">324</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg326" style="text-align: left">326</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg387" style="text-align: left">387</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg390" style="text-align: left">390</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Poetry, English Religious, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg277" style="text-align: left">277</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg278" style="text-align: left">278</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg279" style="text-align: left">279</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Latin, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg246" style="text-align: left">246</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Poitiers, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Fortunatus" style="text-align: left">Fortunatus</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Pontifical System of Indictions, The, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg227" style="text-align: left">227</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg254" style="text-align: left">254</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Pontus, The, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg317" style="text-align: left">317</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Praetorian Guards, The, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg014" style="text-align: left">14</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Praise of
            Virgins, The,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Fortunatus" style="text-align: left">Fortunatus</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Priestfield, Rochester, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg089" style="text-align: left">89</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Primacy, The, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg049" style="text-align: left">49</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg065" style="text-align: left">65</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg066" style="text-align: left">66</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Priscilla, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg197" style="text-align: left">197</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Promised Land, The, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg338" style="text-align: left">338</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Prosper"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Prosper of Aquitaine, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxii" style="text-align: left">xxii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg033" style="text-align: left">33</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            account of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg021" style="text-align: left">21</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            quoted, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg021" style="text-align: left">21</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Prosper Tiro, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg021" style="text-align: left">21</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Psalms,
            The,”</span> quoted, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg101" style="text-align: left">101</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg107" style="text-align: left">107</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg174" style="text-align: left">174</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg223" style="text-align: left">223</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg334" style="text-align: left">334</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Puch, a thegn, his wife healed by John of Beverley, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg307" style="text-align: left">307</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg308" style="text-align: left">308</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Putta-Rochester"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Putta, Bishop of Rochester, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg216" style="text-align: left">216</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg218" style="text-align: left">218</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            at the Hertford Synod, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg228" style="text-align: left">228</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            leaves Rochester for Mercia, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg242" style="text-align: left">242</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his unworldliness, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg242" style="text-align: left">242</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            teaches Church music, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg242" style="text-align: left">242</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg242" style="text-align: left">242</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Putta-Hereford"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Putta, Bishop of Hereford, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg218" style="text-align: left">218</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg380" style="text-align: left">380</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Purgatory, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg326" style="text-align: left">326</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg327" style="text-align: left">327</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg329" style="text-align: left">329</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg330" style="text-align: left">330</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Quartodecimans, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg084" style="text-align: left">84</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg129" style="text-align: left">129</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg143" style="text-align: left">143</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg196" style="text-align: left">196</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Quenburga, daughter of Cearl, first wife of Edwin, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg119" style="text-align: left">119</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Quentavic, Quentae vicus, or Etaples, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Etaples" style="text-align: left">Etaples</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Quodvultdeus, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg179" style="text-align: left">179</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Quoenburg, daughter of Heriburg, healed by the prayers of Bishop
            John of Beverley, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg305" style="text-align: left">305-307</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Racuulfe, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Reculver-Racuulfe" style="text-align: left">Reculver</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Raedfrid, Egbert's reeve, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg215" style="text-align: left">215</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Raegenheri, son of Redwald, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg115" style="text-align: left">115</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Rameses, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg362" style="text-align: left">362</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ramsbury, Diocese of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg343" style="text-align: left">343</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Rathbed, King of Frisland, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg319" style="text-align: left">319</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg320" style="text-align: left">320</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Rathmelsigi, Monastery of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg204" style="text-align: left">204</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ravenna, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg041" style="text-align: left">41</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Rebecca's Tomb, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg341" style="text-align: left">341</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg342" style="text-align: left">342</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Reculver-Racuulfe"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Reculver or Racuulfe, Monastery of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg315" style="text-align: left">315</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Reculver, Abbot of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Bertwald" style="text-align: left">Bertwald</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Redbridge"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Redbridge, Ford of Reeds, or Hreutford, Monastery of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg253" style="text-align: left">253</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Redbridge, Abbot of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Cynibert-Redbridge" style="text-align: left">Cynibert</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Redger"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Redger, Archbishop of Maintz, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg392" style="text-align: left">392</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Redwald"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Redwald, King of the East Angles, fourth Bretwalda, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg094" style="text-align: left">94</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg112" style="text-align: left">112</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg120" style="text-align: left">120</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg171" style="text-align: left">171</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his protection of Edwin, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg112" style="text-align: left">112-115</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            leads an army against Ethelfrid, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg115" style="text-align: left">115</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            banishes Sigbert, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg121" style="text-align: left">121</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg172" style="text-align: left">172</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his conversion and perversion, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg121" style="text-align: left">121</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his genealogy, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg121" style="text-align: left">121</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his Queen, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg114" style="text-align: left">114</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg115" style="text-align: left">115</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg121" style="text-align: left">121</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Reeves"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Reeves, Dr., editorial reference to his <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Culdees,”</span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg023" style="text-align: left">23</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            to his edition of Adamnan's <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Life of St. Columba,”</span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg140" style="text-align: left">140</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg142" style="text-align: left">142</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Reginald"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Reginald of Durham, editorial references to his <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Life of St. Oswald,”</span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg148" style="text-align: left">148</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg154" style="text-align: left">154</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Religious Orders, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg202" style="text-align: left">202</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg203" style="text-align: left">203</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Rendlesham, Rendlaesham or Rendil's Dwelling, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg185" style="text-align: left">185</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Reppington, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Repton" style="text-align: left">Repton</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Reptacaestir, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Richborough" style="text-align: left">Richborough</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Reptiles, their absence from Ireland, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg008" style="text-align: left">8</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Repton"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Repton or Reppington, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg181" style="text-align: left">181</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Responsa, Gregory's, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Gregory-Great" style="text-align: left">Gregory's Answers</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Restennet, near Forfar, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg360" style="text-align: left">360</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Resurrection, Doctrine of the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg078" style="text-align: left">78</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Retford, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg115" style="text-align: left">115</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Reuda"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Reuda, leader of the Scots, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg008" style="text-align: left">8</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Rhine, the River, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg009" style="text-align: left">9</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg022" style="text-align: left">22</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg322" style="text-align: left">322</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg324" style="text-align: left">324</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Rhŷs, Dr., editorial references to his <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Celtic Britain,”</span> vi, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg007" style="text-align: left">7</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg008" style="text-align: left">8</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg023" style="text-align: left">23</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg029" style="text-align: left">29</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg073" style="text-align: left">73</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg086" style="text-align: left">86</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg317" style="text-align: left">317</a> n.
          </div>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page431">[pg 431]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg431"/>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Riada, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Reuda" style="text-align: left">Reuda</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Richard of Hexham, editorial references to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg244" style="text-align: left">244</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg303" style="text-align: left">303</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Richborough"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Richborough, Reptacaestir or Rutubi Portus, Kent, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg005" style="text-align: left">5</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg045" style="text-align: left">45</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Richmond, Yorks., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg120" style="text-align: left">120</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ricula, sister of Ethelbert, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg089" style="text-align: left">89</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ricbert kills Earpwald, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg121" style="text-align: left">121</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Ripon"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ripon, or Inhrypum, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg120" style="text-align: left">120</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Monastery of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg161" style="text-align: left">161</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg194" style="text-align: left">194</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg218" style="text-align: left">218</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg244" style="text-align: left">244</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg257" style="text-align: left">257</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg295" style="text-align: left">295</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg301" style="text-align: left">301</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg320" style="text-align: left">320</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg346" style="text-align: left">346</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg350" style="text-align: left">350</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg353" style="text-align: left">353</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg356" style="text-align: left">356</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            diocese of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg244" style="text-align: left">244</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg353" style="text-align: left">353</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ripon, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Eadhaed" style="text-align: left">Eadhaed</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ripon, Abbot of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Wilfrid-St" style="text-align: left">Wilfrid</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ritual, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg051" style="text-align: left">51</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg085" style="text-align: left">85</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Rochester"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Rochester, Dorubrevis, Hrofaescaestrae or The Kentish Castle,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg163" style="text-align: left">163</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg228" style="text-align: left">228</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg229" style="text-align: left">229</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg242" style="text-align: left">242</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            diocese of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg089" style="text-align: left">89</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg132" style="text-align: left">132</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg179" style="text-align: left">179</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Rochester, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Aldwulf-Rochester" style="text-align: left">Aldwulf</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Cuichelm-Rochester" style="text-align: left">Cuichelm</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Damian" style="text-align: left">Damian</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Gebmund" style="text-align: left">Gebmund</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ithamar" style="text-align: left">Ithamar</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Justus" style="text-align: left">Justus</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Paulinus-York" style="text-align: left">Paulinus</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Putta-Rochester" style="text-align: left">Putta</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Romanus-Rochester" style="text-align: left">Romanus</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Tobias" style="text-align: left">Tobias</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Roger of Wendover, editorial references to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg252" style="text-align: left">252</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg321" style="text-align: left">321</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Roman Law, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg052" style="text-align: left">52</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Roman remains at Grantchester, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg261" style="text-align: left">261</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Romans, The, in Britain, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiii" style="text-align: left">xxiii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg009" style="text-align: left">9-23</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg025" style="text-align: left">25</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg026" style="text-align: left">26</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg382" style="text-align: left">382</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Rome"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Rome, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg009" style="text-align: left">9</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg011" style="text-align: left">11</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg054" style="text-align: left">54</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg078" style="text-align: left">78</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg092" style="text-align: left">92</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg093" style="text-align: left">93</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg099" style="text-align: left">99</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg133" style="text-align: left">133</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg161" style="text-align: left">161</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg194" style="text-align: left">194</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg196" style="text-align: left">196</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg214" style="text-align: left">214</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg226" style="text-align: left">226</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg241" style="text-align: left">241</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg245" style="text-align: left">245</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg257" style="text-align: left">257</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg273" style="text-align: left">273</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg312" style="text-align: left">312</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg313" style="text-align: left">313</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg317" style="text-align: left">317</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg324" style="text-align: left">324</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg343" style="text-align: left">343</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg345" style="text-align: left">345</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg348" style="text-align: left">348</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg351" style="text-align: left">351</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg353" style="text-align: left">353</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg358" style="text-align: left">358</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg364" style="text-align: left">364</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg368" style="text-align: left">368</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg385" style="text-align: left">385</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Bede's alleged visit to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxxvi</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            taken by the Goths, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg023" style="text-align: left">23</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg382" style="text-align: left">382</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Apostolic see of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg075" style="text-align: left">75</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg083" style="text-align: left">83</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg091" style="text-align: left">91</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            councils held at, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg254" style="text-align: left">254</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg256" style="text-align: left">256</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg258" style="text-align: left">258</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg352" style="text-align: left">352</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg353" style="text-align: left">353</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg354" style="text-align: left">354</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Romanus-Rochester"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Romanus, Bishop of Rochester after Justus, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg100" style="text-align: left">100</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            drowned on his way to Rome, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg132" style="text-align: left">132</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Romanus, a priest of Queen Eanfled's, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg193" style="text-align: left">193</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg195" style="text-align: left">195</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Romulus, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg313" style="text-align: left">313</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Romulus Augustulus, Emperor, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg041" style="text-align: left">41</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ronan, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg193" style="text-align: left">193</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Rosemarkie, on the Moray Frith, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg360" style="text-align: left">360</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Rowley Water, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg135" style="text-align: left">135</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Rufinianus"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Rufinianus, Abbot of St. Augustine's Monastery, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg064" style="text-align: left">64</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Rügen, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg317" style="text-align: left">317</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Rügenwalde, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg317" style="text-align: left">317</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Rugii, the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg317" style="text-align: left">317</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Rugini, the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg317" style="text-align: left">317</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Rutubi Portus, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Richborough" style="text-align: left">Richborough</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Saba"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Saba, or Sabert, King of Essex, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxiv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg089" style="text-align: left">89</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg096" style="text-align: left">96</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg383" style="text-align: left">383</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his pagan sons, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg095" style="text-align: left">95</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg096" style="text-align: left">96</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxiv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg093" style="text-align: left">93</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg095" style="text-align: left">95</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Sacrarium, Signification of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg158" style="text-align: left">158</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Sacrilege"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Sacrilege, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg051" style="text-align: left">51</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg052" style="text-align: left">52</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg095" style="text-align: left">95</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Sacrifice of Animals, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg067" style="text-align: left">67</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Saethryth"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Saethryth, Abbess of Brige, step-daughter of Anna, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg149" style="text-align: left">149</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg152" style="text-align: left">152</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Saewulf, quoted, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg341" style="text-align: left">341</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Abb's Head, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg260" style="text-align: left">260</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Agnes' Convent, Rome, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg054" style="text-align: left">54</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-St-Albans"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Alban's, Vaeclingacaestir, Verlamacaestir, or Verulam,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg018" style="text-align: left">18</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Monastery of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg018" style="text-align: left">18</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            conference at, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg034" style="text-align: left">34</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Amphibalus, Church of, at Winchester, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg149" style="text-align: left">149</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Andrew's Church, Hexham, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg358" style="text-align: left">358</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Andrew's, Rochester, built by Ethelbert, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg089" style="text-align: left">89</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg163" style="text-align: left">163</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg377" style="text-align: left">377</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg378" style="text-align: left">378</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Andrew's Monastery, Rome, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg042" style="text-align: left">42</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Audrey's Fair, Ely, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg263" style="text-align: left">263</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Audrey's Lace, or Tawdry Lace, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg263" style="text-align: left">263</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-St-Augustines"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Augustine's Monastery, (Monastery of SS. Peter and Paul),
            founded by Augustine, at Canterbury, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxx" style="text-align: left">xxx</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg002" style="text-align: left">2</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg064" style="text-align: left">64</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg072" style="text-align: left">72</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg090" style="text-align: left">90</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg121" style="text-align: left">121</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg216" style="text-align: left">216</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg357" style="text-align: left">357</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Augustine and subsequent archbishops buried there, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg090" style="text-align: left">90</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg098" style="text-align: left">98</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg216" style="text-align: left">216</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg391" style="text-align: left">391</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Augustine's, Abbot of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Albinus" style="text-align: left">Albinus</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Benedict-Biscop" style="text-align: left">Benedict</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Hadrian-Abbot" style="text-align: left">Hadrian</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Peter-Augustines" style="text-align: left">Peter</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Rufinianus" style="text-align: left">Rufinianus</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Bees, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg271" style="text-align: left">271</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Boswells, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg288" style="text-align: left">288</a> n.
          </div>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page432">[pg 432]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg432"/>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Cecilia in Trastevere, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg324" style="text-align: left">324</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Cunibert's Church, Cologne, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg322" style="text-align: left">322</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Ebbe's Church, Oxford, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg260" style="text-align: left">260</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Gallen, Monastery of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg075" style="text-align: left">75</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            its MS. of Cuthbert's Letter to Cuthwin, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Cuthbert-Wearmouth" style="text-align: left">Cuthbert</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Gregory's Chapel in St. Peter's, York, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg131" style="text-align: left">131</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Herbert's Island, Derwentwater, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg294" style="text-align: left">294</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. John's Lee, Hexham, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg303" style="text-align: left">303</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Lawrence's Church, Bradford-on-Avon, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg210" style="text-align: left">210</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Martin of Tours, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg048" style="text-align: left">48</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg141" style="text-align: left">141</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg259" style="text-align: left">259</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Martin's Church, Canterbury, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg048" style="text-align: left">48</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg051" style="text-align: left">51</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Martin's Church, Tours, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg259" style="text-align: left">259</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Martin's Church, Utrecht, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg324" style="text-align: left">324</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Martin's Church, Whitern, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg141" style="text-align: left">141</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Martin's Monastery, Rome, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg257" style="text-align: left">257</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg259" style="text-align: left">259</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Martin's, Rome, Abbot of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-John-Precentor" style="text-align: left">John</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Mary's Church, Bethlehem, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg339" style="text-align: left">339</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Mary's Church, Lichfield, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg224" style="text-align: left">224</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Michael's Church, Malmesbury, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg343" style="text-align: left">343</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Michael's Oratory, Erneshow, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg303" style="text-align: left">303</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Oswald's, near Hexham, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg137" style="text-align: left">137</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Pancras Church, Canterbury, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg210" style="text-align: left">210</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Paul's Cathedral, London, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg089" style="text-align: left">89</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg240" style="text-align: left">240</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Paul's Church, Rome, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg081" style="text-align: left">81</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Peter, the patrimony of, in Gaul, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg044" style="text-align: left">44</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Peter's Church, Bamborough, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg147" style="text-align: left">147</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Peter's Church, Lindisfarne, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg169" style="text-align: left">169</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg192" style="text-align: left">192</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg295" style="text-align: left">295</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg302" style="text-align: left">302</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Peter's Church, Ripon, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg346" style="text-align: left">346</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg356" style="text-align: left">356</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Peter's, Rome, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg081" style="text-align: left">81</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg257" style="text-align: left">257</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg313" style="text-align: left">313</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Peter's Church, Whitby, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg190" style="text-align: left">190</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Peter's Church, York, now York Minster, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg118" style="text-align: left">118</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg119" style="text-align: left">119</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            SS. Peter and Paul, Church and Monastery of, Canterbury, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg094" style="text-align: left">94</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg098" style="text-align: left">98</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg314" style="text-align: left">314</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            and <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-St-Augustines" style="text-align: left">St. Augustine's</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            SS. Peter and Paul, Church of, at Dorchester, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg148" style="text-align: left">148</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            SS. Peter and Paul, Church of, at Winchester, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg149" style="text-align: left">149</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            SS. Peter and Paul, monastery of, at Wearmouth and Jarrow,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg386" style="text-align: left">386</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            and <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Wearmouth-Jarrow" style="text-align: left">Wearmouth</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Saviour's Church, Utrecht, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg324" style="text-align: left">324</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            St. Stephen's Church, Faremoûtier-en-Brie, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg153" style="text-align: left">153</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Santi Quattro Coronati, Church of, at Rome, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg099" style="text-align: left">99</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            S. Lorenzo fuori le Mura, Rome, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg210" style="text-align: left">210</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Saracens, The, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxi" style="text-align: left">xxxi</a>; origin of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg378" style="text-align: left">378</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Sarah's Tomb, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg341" style="text-align: left">341</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg342" style="text-align: left">342</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Saranus, or Saran Ua Critain, Irish Ecclesiastic, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg129" style="text-align: left">129</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Saul, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg073" style="text-align: left">73</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg387" style="text-align: left">387</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Saxon, the name, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg317" style="text-align: left">317</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Saxon
            Chronicle, The,”</span> editorial references to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg125" style="text-align: left">125</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg231" style="text-align: left">231</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg241" style="text-align: left">241</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg342" style="text-align: left">342</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg385" style="text-align: left">385</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Saxons, The, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiii" style="text-align: left">xxiii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg013" style="text-align: left">13</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            called in to help the Britons, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg029" style="text-align: left">29</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            conquer Britain, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg029" style="text-align: left">29</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg030" style="text-align: left">30</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg031" style="text-align: left">31</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            settled in Britain, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg037" style="text-align: left">37</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg042" style="text-align: left">42</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Saxony, Old, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg030" style="text-align: left">30</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Scandinavia, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg007" style="text-align: left">7</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg317" style="text-align: left">317</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Scarborough, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg275" style="text-align: left">275</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Scarlet Dye made from snails, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg005" style="text-align: left">5</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Scellanus, Irish priest, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg129" style="text-align: left">129</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Schleswig, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg030" style="text-align: left">30</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Schools, founded by Sigbert, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg172" style="text-align: left">172</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            in Gaul, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg121" style="text-align: left">121</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg172" style="text-align: left">172</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            in Kent, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg121" style="text-align: left">121</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg172" style="text-align: left">172</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Scotland, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ireland" style="text-align: left">Ireland</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Scottia, signification of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg092" style="text-align: left">92</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Scottish Language, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg006" style="text-align: left">6</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Scots, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">i.e.</span></span>, Irish, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiii" style="text-align: left">xxiii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxi" style="text-align: left">xxxi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg007" style="text-align: left">7</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg008" style="text-align: left">8</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg009" style="text-align: left">9</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg091" style="text-align: left">91</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg191" style="text-align: left">191</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            incursions of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg020" style="text-align: left">20</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg023" style="text-align: left">23</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg026" style="text-align: left">26</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Christianity among, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg008" style="text-align: left">8</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg026" style="text-align: left">26</a>, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page433">[pg 433]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" style="text-align: left" id="Pg433"/> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg027" style="text-align: left">27</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            their observance of Easter, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg091" style="text-align: left">91</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg092" style="text-align: left">92</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg128" style="text-align: left">128</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg129" style="text-align: left">129</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            expelled from England, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg028" style="text-align: left">28</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg073" style="text-align: left">73</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg074" style="text-align: left">74</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg094" style="text-align: left">94</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            of Dalriada, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg008" style="text-align: left">8</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg073" style="text-align: left">73</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg142" style="text-align: left">142</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg286" style="text-align: left">286</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg381" style="text-align: left">381</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Scots, King of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Aedan" style="text-align: left">Aedan</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Conall" style="text-align: left">Conall</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Scott, Sir W., editorial reference to his <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Antiquary,”</span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg025" style="text-align: left">25</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Scylla, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg365" style="text-align: left">365</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Scythia, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg007" style="text-align: left">7</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Seals in Britain, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg005" style="text-align: left">5</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Sebbi"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Sebbi, Joint King of Essex, brother of Sigbert the Little,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxviii" style="text-align: left">xxviii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg212" style="text-align: left">212</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg232" style="text-align: left">232</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg316" style="text-align: left">316</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his piety, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg212" style="text-align: left">212</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg238" style="text-align: left">238</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg239" style="text-align: left">239</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his queen, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg238" style="text-align: left">238</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg240" style="text-align: left">240</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            retires into a monastery, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg238" style="text-align: left">238</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg239" style="text-align: left">239</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his vision, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg239" style="text-align: left">239</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg240" style="text-align: left">240</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg212" style="text-align: left">212</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg239" style="text-align: left">239</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg240" style="text-align: left">240</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            burial, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg240" style="text-align: left">240</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            posthumous miracle, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg240" style="text-align: left">240</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Sedulius"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Sedulius, author of <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Carmen Paschale,”</span> and <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Opus Paschale,”</span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg344" style="text-align: left">344</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Segeni"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Segeni, Abbot of Iona, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg144" style="text-align: left">144</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Segenus, Irish priest, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg129" style="text-align: left">129</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Selaeseu, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Selsey" style="text-align: left">Selsey</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Selred, King of the East Saxons, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg346" style="text-align: left">346</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Selsey"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Selsey, Selaeseu, or the Island of the Sea-calf, monastery at,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg247" style="text-align: left">247</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            diocese of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg251" style="text-align: left">251</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg345" style="text-align: left">345</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg379" style="text-align: left">379</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Selsey, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Eadbert-Selsey" style="text-align: left">Eadbert</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Eolla" style="text-align: left">Eolla</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Sigfrid" style="text-align: left">Sigfrid</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Selsey, Abbot of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Eappa" style="text-align: left">Eappa</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Eadbert-Selsey" style="text-align: left">Eadbert</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Senlis, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Liudhard" style="text-align: left">Liudhard</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Senones, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg215" style="text-align: left">215</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Sens, Archbishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Emme" style="text-align: left">Emme</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Wulfram" style="text-align: left">Wulfram</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Sepulchre, The Holy, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg339" style="text-align: left">339</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg340" style="text-align: left">340</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Sergius I, Pope, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg312" style="text-align: left">312</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg313" style="text-align: left">313</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg314" style="text-align: left">314</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg323" style="text-align: left">323</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg343" style="text-align: left">343</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Serpent, the Devil, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg266" style="text-align: left">266</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Severianus, St., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg099" style="text-align: left">99</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Severianus, Pelagian Bishop, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg032" style="text-align: left">32</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Severinus, Pope, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg128" style="text-align: left">128</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg129" style="text-align: left">129</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Severn, The river, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg084" style="text-align: left">84</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg380" style="text-align: left">380</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Severus, Emperor, divides Britain by a rampart, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg012" style="text-align: left">12</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg013" style="text-align: left">13</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg025" style="text-align: left">25</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg382" style="text-align: left">382</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his government of Britain, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg012" style="text-align: left">12</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg012" style="text-align: left">12</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg013" style="text-align: left">13</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Severus-Treves"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Severus, Bishop of Trèves, accompanies Germanus to Britain,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg039" style="text-align: left">39</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg040" style="text-align: left">40</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Sexbald of Essex, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg184" style="text-align: left">184</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Sexburg-Anna"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Sexburg, daughter of Anna, wife of Earconbert, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg149" style="text-align: left">149</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg152" style="text-align: left">152</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg269" style="text-align: left">269</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Abbess of Ely and of Sheppey, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg261" style="text-align: left">261</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            acts as regent, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg261" style="text-align: left">261</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            translates Ethelthryth's bones, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg261" style="text-align: left">261</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg262" style="text-align: left">262</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Sexburg, wife of Coinwalch, reigns in Wessex, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg241" style="text-align: left">241</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Sexwulf"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Sexwulf, Abbot of Medeshamstead, afterwards Bishop of Mercia, in
            place of Wynfrid, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg218" style="text-align: left">218</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg231" style="text-align: left">231</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg242" style="text-align: left">242</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg244" style="text-align: left">244</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg356" style="text-align: left">356</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            account of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg231" style="text-align: left">231</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            expelled from Mercia, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg244" style="text-align: left">244</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Sheppey, Monastery of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg261" style="text-align: left">261</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Sheppey, Abbess of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ermingild" style="text-align: left">Ermingild</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Sexburg-Anna" style="text-align: left">Sexburg</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Sherborne, Diocese of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxx" style="text-align: left">xxx</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg343" style="text-align: left">343</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Sherborne, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Aldhelm" style="text-align: left">Aldhelm</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Forthere-Sherborne" style="text-align: left">Forthere</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Sidnacaestir, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg004" style="text-align: left">4</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg243" style="text-align: left">243</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Sigbert-Anglia"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Sigbert, King of East Anglia, half-brother to Earpwald, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxv" style="text-align: left">xxv</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg121" style="text-align: left">121</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg171" style="text-align: left">171</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg182" style="text-align: left">182</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            driven into exile by Redwald, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg121" style="text-align: left">121</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg172" style="text-align: left">172</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            returns home, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg172" style="text-align: left">172</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            restores Christianity in East Anglia, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg121" style="text-align: left">121</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his piety and good works, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg171" style="text-align: left">171</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg172" style="text-align: left">172</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            abdicates and retires into a monastery, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg172" style="text-align: left">172</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            drawn out to lead his people against the Mercians, and killed in
            battle, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg172" style="text-align: left">172</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Sigbert-Good"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Sigbert the Good, King of Essex, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvii" style="text-align: left">xxvii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg182" style="text-align: left">182</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg183" style="text-align: left">183</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg184" style="text-align: left">184</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Sigbert the Little, King of Essex, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg182" style="text-align: left">182</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg212" style="text-align: left">212</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Sigfrid"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Sigfrid, Bishop of Selsey, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg345" style="text-align: left">345</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg390" style="text-align: left">390</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Sighard"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Sighard, King of Essex, son of Sebbi, reigns jointly with his
            brother Suefred, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg240" style="text-align: left">240</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Sighere"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Sighere, Joint King of Essex, son of Sigbert the Little, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg212" style="text-align: left">212</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg232" style="text-align: left">232</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg346" style="text-align: left">346</a>.
          </div>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page434">[pg 434]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg434"/>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Simeon of Durham, editorial references to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxxiv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxl" style="text-align: left">xl</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg204" style="text-align: left">204</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg244" style="text-align: left">244</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg288" style="text-align: left">288</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg294" style="text-align: left">294</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg295" style="text-align: left">295</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg309" style="text-align: left">309</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg325" style="text-align: left">325</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg377" style="text-align: left">377</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg391" style="text-align: left">391</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Simoniacs, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg372" style="text-align: left">372</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Simon Magus, his tonsure, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg371" style="text-align: left">371</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg372" style="text-align: left">372</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg373" style="text-align: left">373</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Sinai, Mount, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg060" style="text-align: left">60</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Sirmium, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg020" style="text-align: left">20</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Sister-in-law, marriage with a, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg052" style="text-align: left">52</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg053" style="text-align: left">53</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Skene"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Skene, editorial references to his <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Celtic Scotland,”</span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg032" style="text-align: left">32</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg073" style="text-align: left">73</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg140" style="text-align: left">140</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg325" style="text-align: left">325</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Slack (perhaps Campodonum), <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg120" style="text-align: left">120</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Slave Market at Rome, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg082" style="text-align: left">82</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Slaves, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg082" style="text-align: left">82</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg145" style="text-align: left">145</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg202" style="text-align: left">202</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg248" style="text-align: left">248</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg349" style="text-align: left">349</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Smith, his edition of the <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Ecclesiastical History,”</span> editorial
            references to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxix" style="text-align: left">xix</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxx" style="text-align: left">xx</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg125" style="text-align: left">125</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg303" style="text-align: left">303</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg305" style="text-align: left">305</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg322" style="text-align: left">322</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Snails, dye made from, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg005" style="text-align: left">5</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Snakes, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg008" style="text-align: left">8</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Soissons, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg194" style="text-align: left">194</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Solent"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Solent, or Solvente, The, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg253" style="text-align: left">253</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Solinus, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxii" style="text-align: left">xxii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg005" style="text-align: left">5</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Solvente, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Solent" style="text-align: left">Solent</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Solway, The, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg013" style="text-align: left">13</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg136" style="text-align: left">136</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Somerset, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg343" style="text-align: left">343</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Southampton, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg252" style="text-align: left">252</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Southampton Water, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg245" style="text-align: left">245</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            South Brabant, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg177" style="text-align: left">177</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-South-Burton"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            South Burton, now Bishop Burton, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg307" style="text-align: left">307</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            South Downs, the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg245" style="text-align: left">245</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Southern Gyrwas, locality of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg259" style="text-align: left">259</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            ealdorman of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Tondbert" style="text-align: left">Tondbert</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            South Mercia, King of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Peada" style="text-align: left">Peada</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            South Saxons, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg030" style="text-align: left">30</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg045" style="text-align: left">45</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            diocese of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Selsey" style="text-align: left">Selsey</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            kingdom of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Sussex" style="text-align: left">Sussex</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            South Wales, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg084" style="text-align: left">84</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Southwell, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg123" style="text-align: left">123</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Spain, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg005" style="text-align: left">5</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg007" style="text-align: left">7</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg019" style="text-align: left">19</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Church of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg087" style="text-align: left">87</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg256" style="text-align: left">256</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Springs, salt and hot, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg005" style="text-align: left">5</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg006" style="text-align: left">6</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Staffordshire, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg267" style="text-align: left">267</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Stamford, Lincs., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg350" style="text-align: left">350</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Stamford Bridge, Yorks., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg350" style="text-align: left">350</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Stanford, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg350" style="text-align: left">350</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Stapleton, Thomas, his translation of the <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Ecclesiastical History,”</span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxi" style="text-align: left">xxi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg249" style="text-align: left">249</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Stephen, St., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg153" style="text-align: left">153</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg335" style="text-align: left">335</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Stephen III, Pope, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg324" style="text-align: left">324</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg392" style="text-align: left">392</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Stephen, surname of Eddius, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg217" style="text-align: left">217</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Stepmother, marriage with a, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg052" style="text-align: left">52</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg053" style="text-align: left">53</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg095" style="text-align: left">95</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg097" style="text-align: left">97</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Stevens, John, his translation of the <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Ecclesiastical History,”</span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgv" style="text-align: left">v</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxi" style="text-align: left">xxi</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Stevenson"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Stevenson, editorial references to his edition of the
            <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Ecclesiastical
            History,”</span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxx" style="text-align: left">xx</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            to his <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Church
            Historians,”</span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxl" style="text-align: left">xl</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg246" style="text-align: left">246</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Stevenson, W. H., editorial reference to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg032" style="text-align: left">32</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Stigmata, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg176" style="text-align: left">176</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Stokes"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Stokes, Margaret, editorial reference to her <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Three Months in the Forests
            of France,”</span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg173" style="text-align: left">173</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Stonar, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg045" style="text-align: left">45</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Stone, used in building churches, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg119" style="text-align: left">119</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg141" style="text-align: left">141</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg142" style="text-align: left">142</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg359" style="text-align: left">359</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Stoneham"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Stoneham, or At the Stone, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg252" style="text-align: left">252</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Stour, the river, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg045" style="text-align: left">45</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Stow, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg243" style="text-align: left">243</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Strathclyde, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg141" style="text-align: left">141</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg286" style="text-align: left">286</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg325" style="text-align: left">325</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg336" style="text-align: left">336</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg392" style="text-align: left">392</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Streanaeshalch, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg195" style="text-align: left">195</a>, and <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Whitby-Bay" style="text-align: left">Whitby</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Stubbs, editorial references to his <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Constitutional History,”</span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg267" style="text-align: left">267</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg321" style="text-align: left">321</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            to his articles in <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Dictionary of Christian Biography,”</span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg237" style="text-align: left">237</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg377" style="text-align: left">377</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            and <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Haddan-Stubbs" style="text-align: left">Haddan and Stubbs</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Studies in the
            Christian Character,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Paget" style="text-align: left">Paget</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Suaebhard"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Suaebhard, Joint King of Kent, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg240" style="text-align: left">240</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg287" style="text-align: left">287</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg315" style="text-align: left">315</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg316" style="text-align: left">316</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Sudergeona (Surrey), <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg232" style="text-align: left">232</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Suefred"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Suefred, or Swefred, King of Essex, son of Sebbi, reigns jointly
            with his brother Sighard, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg240" style="text-align: left">240</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg316" style="text-align: left">316</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            grants land at Twickenham to Waldhere, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg239" style="text-align: left">239</a> n.
          </div>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page435">[pg 435]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg435"/>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Suevi, the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg022" style="text-align: left">22</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg092" style="text-align: left">92</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Suffolk, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg112" style="text-align: left">112</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg122" style="text-align: left">122</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg174" style="text-align: left">174</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg185" style="text-align: left">185</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg266" style="text-align: left">266</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            bishopric of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg231" style="text-align: left">231</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Suidbert-Abbot"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Suidbert, Abbot of Dacre, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg299" style="text-align: left">299</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Suidbert, St., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg319" style="text-align: left">319</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg323" style="text-align: left">323</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg324" style="text-align: left">324</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Suidhelm"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Suidhelm, King of Essex after Sigbert, son of Sexwald, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvii" style="text-align: left">xxvii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg184" style="text-align: left">184</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg185" style="text-align: left">185</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg212" style="text-align: left">212</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Supernatural Appearances, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg234" style="text-align: left">234</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg235" style="text-align: left">235</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg236" style="text-align: left">236</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg237" style="text-align: left">237</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            fragrance, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg237" style="text-align: left">237</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">and
            see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Visions" style="text-align: left">Visions</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Surnames, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg179" style="text-align: left">179</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Surrey, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg232" style="text-align: left">232</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg343" style="text-align: left">343</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Sussex"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Sussex, History, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxix" style="text-align: left">xxix</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg003" style="text-align: left">3</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg179" style="text-align: left">179</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg245" style="text-align: left">245</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg246" style="text-align: left">246</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg343" style="text-align: left">343</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Sussex, King of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Aelli" style="text-align: left">Aelli</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ethelwalch" style="text-align: left">Ethelwalch</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Swale, the river, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg120" style="text-align: left">120</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Swefred, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Suefred" style="text-align: left">Suefred</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Sylvester, St., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg257" style="text-align: left">257</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Symmachus, Pope, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg257" style="text-align: left">257</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Synods"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Synods, or Councils, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvii" style="text-align: left">xxvii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxviii" style="text-align: left">xxviii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxix" style="text-align: left">xxix</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg033" style="text-align: left">33</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg034" style="text-align: left">34</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg084" style="text-align: left">84</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg086" style="text-align: left">86</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg087" style="text-align: left">87</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg092" style="text-align: left">92</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg093" style="text-align: left">93</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg151" style="text-align: left">151</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg194" style="text-align: left">194</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg195" style="text-align: left">195-201</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg227" style="text-align: left">227</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg254" style="text-align: left">254</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg255" style="text-align: left">255</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg292" style="text-align: left">292</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg305" style="text-align: left">305</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg343" style="text-align: left">343</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg350" style="text-align: left">350</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg356" style="text-align: left">356</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg384" style="text-align: left">384</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg385" style="text-align: left">385</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            rules for, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg229" style="text-align: left">229</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Synodical Epistle, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Gregory-Great" style="text-align: left">Gregory</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Syria, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg011" style="text-align: left">11</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg255" style="text-align: left">255</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Tacitus, editorial references to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg011" style="text-align: left">11</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg317" style="text-align: left">317</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Tadcaster, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg271" style="text-align: left">271</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Tanfield (perhaps Campodonum), <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg120" style="text-align: left">120</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Tarsus, Cilicia, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg002" style="text-align: left">2</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg214" style="text-align: left">214</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Tata, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ethelberg-Tata" style="text-align: left">Ethelberg</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Tatfrid"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Tatfrid, bishop elect of the Hwiccas, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg274" style="text-align: left">274</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Tatwine"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Tatwine, a priest of Bredon, afterwards Archbishop of Canterbury,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxi" style="text-align: left">xxxi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg379" style="text-align: left">379</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg386" style="text-align: left">386</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg390" style="text-align: left">390</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Tawdry, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg263" style="text-align: left">263</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Tecla, St., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg265" style="text-align: left">265</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Tees, the river, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg082" style="text-align: left">82</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Temples, Heathen, to be converted into churches, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg067" style="text-align: left">67</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            to be destroyed, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg070" style="text-align: left">70</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            half Christian and half heathen, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg121" style="text-align: left">121</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Testry, battle of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg320" style="text-align: left">320</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Thame, the river, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg148" style="text-align: left">148</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Thames, the river, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg010" style="text-align: left">10</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg084" style="text-align: left">84</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg148" style="text-align: left">148</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg183" style="text-align: left">183</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Thanet, Isle of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg032" style="text-align: left">32</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg045" style="text-align: left">45</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg315" style="text-align: left">315</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Theft, Sacrilegious, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Sacrilege" style="text-align: left">Sacrilege</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Theium, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg078" style="text-align: left">78</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Theodbald, brother of Ethelfrid, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg073" style="text-align: left">73</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg074" style="text-align: left">74</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Theodebert"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Theodebert, King of Austrasia, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg045" style="text-align: left">45</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Theoderic"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Theoderic, King of Burgundy, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg045" style="text-align: left">45</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Theodore-Archbishop"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Theodore, of Tarsus, Archbishop of Canterbury, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxviii" style="text-align: left">xxviii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxix" style="text-align: left">xxix</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxx" style="text-align: left">xxx</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg122" style="text-align: left">122</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg151" style="text-align: left">151</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg207" style="text-align: left">207</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg273" style="text-align: left">273</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg316" style="text-align: left">316</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg351" style="text-align: left">351</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg357" style="text-align: left">357</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg377" style="text-align: left">377</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            account of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg002" style="text-align: left">2</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg214" style="text-align: left">214</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his journey to Britain, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg215" style="text-align: left">215</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg216" style="text-align: left">216</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            arrival, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg216" style="text-align: left">216</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg226" style="text-align: left">226</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            ordination and consecration, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg213" style="text-align: left">213</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg214" style="text-align: left">214</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg215" style="text-align: left">215</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg216" style="text-align: left">216</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg384" style="text-align: left">384</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his learning, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg002" style="text-align: left">2</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg216" style="text-align: left">216</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg217" style="text-align: left">217</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his subdivision of bishoprics, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg137" style="text-align: left">137</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg218" style="text-align: left">218</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg219" style="text-align: left">219</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg231" style="text-align: left">231</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg244" style="text-align: left">244</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg343" style="text-align: left">343</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            dedicates St. Peter's, Lindisfarne, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg192" style="text-align: left">192</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his tonsure, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg214" style="text-align: left">214</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg215" style="text-align: left">215</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his visitation, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg216" style="text-align: left">216</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his teaching, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg216" style="text-align: left">216</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg217" style="text-align: left">217</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            bishops consecrated by him, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg217" style="text-align: left">217</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg218" style="text-align: left">218</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg224" style="text-align: left">224</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg225" style="text-align: left">225</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg230" style="text-align: left">230</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg231" style="text-align: left">231</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg232" style="text-align: left">232</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg241" style="text-align: left">241</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg242" style="text-align: left">242</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg244" style="text-align: left">244</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg293" style="text-align: left">293</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            presides at the Synod of Hertford, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg226" style="text-align: left">226-231</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg384" style="text-align: left">384</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            of Hatfield, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg254" style="text-align: left">254</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg255" style="text-align: left">255</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg256" style="text-align: left">256</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg385" style="text-align: left">385</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            of Twyford, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg292" style="text-align: left">292</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his quarrel and reconciliation with Wilfrid, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg228" style="text-align: left">228</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg231" style="text-align: left">231</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg352" style="text-align: left">352</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg353" style="text-align: left">353</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            reconciles Egfrid and Ethelred, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg267" style="text-align: left">267</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            on blood-letting, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg306" style="text-align: left">306</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his decrees of 678, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg353" style="text-align: left">353</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            length of his episcopate, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg216" style="text-align: left">216</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            foretells the length of his life, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg314" style="text-align: left">314</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg314" style="text-align: left">314</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg323" style="text-align: left">323</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg385" style="text-align: left">385</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            burial, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg090" style="text-align: left">90</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg314" style="text-align: left">314</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his epitaph, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg315" style="text-align: left">315</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his character, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg315" style="text-align: left">315</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Theodore-Theodorus"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Theodore, or Theodorus, Bishop of Mopsuestia, heretic, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg255" style="text-align: left">255</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg256" style="text-align: left">256</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Theodore, the name, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg179" style="text-align: left">179</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Theodoret"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Theodoret, Bishop of Cyrus, heretic, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg255" style="text-align: left">255</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg256" style="text-align: left">256</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Theodorus, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg340" style="text-align: left">340</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            and <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Theodore-Theodorus" style="text-align: left">Theodore</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Theodosius the Great, Emperor, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg020" style="text-align: left">20</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg022" style="text-align: left">22</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg369" style="text-align: left">369</a>.
          </div>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page436">[pg 436]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg436"/>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Theodosius, father of Theodosius the Great, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg020" style="text-align: left">20</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Theodosius the Younger, Emperor, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg026" style="text-align: left">26</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Theophilus"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Theophilus, Archbishop of Alexandria, his Paschal computation,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg369" style="text-align: left">369</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Thetford, Diocese of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg231" style="text-align: left">231</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Theudor"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Theudor, King of the Britons of Strathclyde, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg391" style="text-align: left">391</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg392" style="text-align: left">392</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Thomas-Anglia"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Thomas, Bishop of East Anglia after Felix, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg178" style="text-align: left">178</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg179" style="text-align: left">179</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Thomas of Elmham, editorial references to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg287" style="text-align: left">287</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg316" style="text-align: left">316</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Thrace, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg020" style="text-align: left">20</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Three Months in
            the Forests of France,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Stokes" style="text-align: left">Stokes</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Thruidred"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Thruidred, Abbot of Dacre, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg300" style="text-align: left">300</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Thuuf, or Tufa, a banner, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg124" style="text-align: left">124</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Thrydwulf, Abbot, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg120" style="text-align: left">120</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Tiberius Constantine, Emperor, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg078" style="text-align: left">78</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Tiburtina, Via, Rome, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg210" style="text-align: left">210</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Tighernach,
            Annals of,”</span> editorial references to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg140" style="text-align: left">140</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg337" style="text-align: left">337</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Tilbury, or Tilaburg, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg183" style="text-align: left">183</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg187" style="text-align: left">187</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Till, The River, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg120" style="text-align: left">120</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Tilmon, his vision of the Hewalds, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg322" style="text-align: left">322</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Timothy, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg197" style="text-align: left">197</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“The Epistle
            to,”</span> quoted, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg050" style="text-align: left">50</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Tininghame"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Tininghame, or Intiningaham, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg325" style="text-align: left">325</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Tiowulfingacaestir, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg123" style="text-align: left">123</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Titillus, Theodore's notary, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg230" style="text-align: left">230</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Tobias"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Tobias, Bishop of Rochester, disciple of Theodore and Hadrian,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxi" style="text-align: left">xxxi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg314" style="text-align: left">314</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg316" style="text-align: left">316</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg377" style="text-align: left">377</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg387" style="text-align: left">387</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            account of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg316" style="text-align: left">316</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his learning, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg377" style="text-align: left">377</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg316" style="text-align: left">316</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg377" style="text-align: left">377</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            burial, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg377" style="text-align: left">377</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg378" style="text-align: left">378</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Toledo, Council of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg256" style="text-align: left">256</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Tomene"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Tomene, or Tomianus, Abbot and Bishop of Armagh, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg128" style="text-align: left">128</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg129" style="text-align: left">129</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Tondbert"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Tondbert, first husband of Ethelthryth, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg259" style="text-align: left">259</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg266" style="text-align: left">266</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Tondhere, Oswin's thegn, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg164" style="text-align: left">164</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Tonsure, the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg085" style="text-align: left">85</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg201" style="text-align: left">201</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg214" style="text-align: left">214</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg215" style="text-align: left">215</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg370" style="text-align: left">370-373</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg386" style="text-align: left">386</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Tours, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg141" style="text-align: left">141</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg259" style="text-align: left">259</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            battle of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg378" style="text-align: left">378</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Tours, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Martin-Tours" style="text-align: left">Martin</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Torksey, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg123" style="text-align: left">123</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Tortgyth, a nun of Barking, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg235" style="text-align: left">235</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg236" style="text-align: left">236</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg237" style="text-align: left">237</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Torthere"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Torthere, Bishop of Hereford, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg380" style="text-align: left">380</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Tovecester, or Towcester, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg268" style="text-align: left">268</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Trajectum, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Wiltaburg" style="text-align: left">Wiltaburg</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Trent, The River, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg045" style="text-align: left">45</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg115" style="text-align: left">115</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg123" style="text-align: left">123</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            the battle of the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxix" style="text-align: left">xxix</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg267" style="text-align: left">267</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg268" style="text-align: left">268</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Trèves, or the Treveri, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg040" style="text-align: left">40</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg324" style="text-align: left">324</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Trèves, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Severus-Treves" style="text-align: left">Severus</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Trinity, Invocation of the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxxiv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg087" style="text-align: left">87</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Trinovantes, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg010" style="text-align: left">10</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Tripolis, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg012" style="text-align: left">12</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Troyes, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Lupus" style="text-align: left">Lupus</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Trumbert, one of Bede's teachers, his account of Ceadda, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxv" style="text-align: left">xxxv</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg222" style="text-align: left">222</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg223" style="text-align: left">223</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Trumhere"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Trumhere, Abbot of Gilling, Bishop of Mid-Anglia and Mercia,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg181" style="text-align: left">181</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg191" style="text-align: left">191</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg192" style="text-align: left">192</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg212" style="text-align: left">212</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Trumwine"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Trumwine, Bishop of the Picts, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxix" style="text-align: left">xxix</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg244" style="text-align: left">244</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            account of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg244" style="text-align: left">244</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            retires to Whitby, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg244" style="text-align: left">244</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg286" style="text-align: left">286</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            assists Elfled with his counsels, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg287" style="text-align: left">287</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            at the Synod of Twyford, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg292" style="text-align: left">292</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death and burial at Whitby, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg286" style="text-align: left">286</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Tuam, Archbishopric of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg226" style="text-align: left">226</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Tuda"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Tuda, Bishop of Lindisfarne after Colman, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg201" style="text-align: left">201</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            dies of the Plague, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg204" style="text-align: left">204</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg206" style="text-align: left">206</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg350" style="text-align: left">350</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            buried at Paegnalaech, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg204" style="text-align: left">204</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Tunbert"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Tunbert, Abbot of Gilling, Bishop of Hexham, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg244" style="text-align: left">244</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            appointed and deposed by Theodore, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg244" style="text-align: left">244</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg293" style="text-align: left">293</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Tunna, Abbot of Tunnacaestir, his prayers miraculously release
            his brother Imma, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg268" style="text-align: left">268</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg269" style="text-align: left">269</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg270" style="text-align: left">270</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Tunnacaestir, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg268" style="text-align: left">268</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Tweed, The River (<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Tuidi flumen”</span>), <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg202" style="text-align: left">202</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg288" style="text-align: left">288</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg326" style="text-align: left">326</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Twickenham, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg239" style="text-align: left">239</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Twyford"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Twyford, Adtuifyrdi, or At the Two Fords, Synod at, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg292" style="text-align: left">292</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Tyne, The River, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg013" style="text-align: left">13</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg082" style="text-align: left">82</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg136" style="text-align: left">136</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg303" style="text-align: left">303</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg309" style="text-align: left">309</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg359" style="text-align: left">359</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Tynemouth, Monasteries at, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg309" style="text-align: left">309</a>.
          </div>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page437">[pg 437]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg437"/>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Tynemouth, Abbot of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Herebald" style="text-align: left">Herebald</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Tyrhtel"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Tyrhtel, Bishop of Hereford, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg380" style="text-align: left">380</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Tytilus"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Tytilus, father of Redwald, King of East Anglia, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg121" style="text-align: left">121</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ulster, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg008" style="text-align: left">8</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Ulster, the
            Annals of,”</span> editorial references to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg225" style="text-align: left">225</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg385" style="text-align: left">385</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Ultan"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ultan, a hermit, Abbot of Fosse and Péronne, brother of Fursa,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg177" style="text-align: left">177</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Undalum, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Oundle" style="text-align: left">Oundle</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Urbs Giudi, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg023" style="text-align: left">23</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Urbs Iudeu, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg023" style="text-align: left">23</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Utrecht, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg320" style="text-align: left">320</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg324" style="text-align: left">324</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Utrecht, Archbishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Wilbrord" style="text-align: left">Wilbrord</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Utta"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Utta, Abbot of Gateshead, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg166" style="text-align: left">166</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg180" style="text-align: left">180</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            sent to fetch Eanfled from Kent, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg166" style="text-align: left">166</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg167" style="text-align: left">167</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            calms a storm with oil, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg167" style="text-align: left">167</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Uuffa"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Uuffa, grandfather of Redwald, King of East Anglia, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg121" style="text-align: left">121</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Uuffings, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">i.e.</span></span>, Kings of East Anglia,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg121" style="text-align: left">121</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Uurtigern, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Vortigern" style="text-align: left">Vortigern</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Vaeclingacaestir, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-St-Albans" style="text-align: left">St. Albans</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Valens, Emperor, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg020" style="text-align: left">20</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Valentinian II, Emperor, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg020" style="text-align: left">20</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            expelled from Italy, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg020" style="text-align: left">20</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            restored, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg020" style="text-align: left">20</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            kills Maximus, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg020" style="text-align: left">20</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Valentinian III, Emperor, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg029" style="text-align: left">29</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg383" style="text-align: left">383</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            murders Aetius, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg027" style="text-align: left">27</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg041" style="text-align: left">41</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            murdered, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg041" style="text-align: left">41</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Valerian, Emperor, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg388" style="text-align: left">388</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Vandals, the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg022" style="text-align: left">22</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Vecta, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg030" style="text-align: left">30</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Venantius Fortunatus, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Fortunatus" style="text-align: left">Fortunatus</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Venta, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Winchester" style="text-align: left">Winchester</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Vergil"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Vergil, quoted, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg113" style="text-align: left">113</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg118" style="text-align: left">118</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg159" style="text-align: left">159</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg286" style="text-align: left">286</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg327" style="text-align: left">327</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Vergilius"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Vergilius, Archbishop of Arles, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg049" style="text-align: left">49</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg054" style="text-align: left">54</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg055" style="text-align: left">55</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg063" style="text-align: left">63</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg064" style="text-align: left">64</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Verlamacaestir, or Verulam, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-St-Albans" style="text-align: left">St. Albans</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Vespasian conquers the Isle of Wight, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg011" style="text-align: left">11</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Vestments, Ecclesiastical, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg065" style="text-align: left">65</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Viaticum, the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg249" style="text-align: left">249</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg275" style="text-align: left">275</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg280" style="text-align: left">280</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Victgilsus, Father of Hengist and Horsa, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg030" style="text-align: left">30</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Victorinus, St., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg099" style="text-align: left">99</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Victorius, or Victorinus of Aquitaine, his Paschal Cycle,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg369" style="text-align: left">369</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Vienne, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg022" style="text-align: left">22</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Vines in Britain, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg005" style="text-align: left">5</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            in Ireland, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg009" style="text-align: left">9</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Vergil" style="text-align: left">Vergil</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Virginity, poem in honour of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg264" style="text-align: left">264</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg265" style="text-align: left">265</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg266" style="text-align: left">266</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg267" style="text-align: left">267</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Aldhelm's work on, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg237" style="text-align: left">237</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg344" style="text-align: left">344</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Visions"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Visions, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxx" style="text-align: left">xxx</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg248" style="text-align: left">248</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg249" style="text-align: left">249</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg250" style="text-align: left">250</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg332" style="text-align: left">332</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg333" style="text-align: left">333</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg334" style="text-align: left">334</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg335" style="text-align: left">335</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg336" style="text-align: left">336</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            seen by Adamnan, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg281" style="text-align: left">281</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg282" style="text-align: left">282</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg283" style="text-align: left">283</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg284" style="text-align: left">284</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            by Begu, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg275" style="text-align: left">275</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg276" style="text-align: left">276</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            by a nun at Whitby, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg277" style="text-align: left">277</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            by Bregusuid, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg274" style="text-align: left">274</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            by Caedmon, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg278" style="text-align: left">278</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg279" style="text-align: left">279</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            by Drythelm, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg325" style="text-align: left">325-331</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            at Barking, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg232" style="text-align: left">232-237</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            by Earcongota, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg152" style="text-align: left">152</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg153" style="text-align: left">153</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            by Edwin, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg112" style="text-align: left">112</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg113" style="text-align: left">113</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg114" style="text-align: left">114</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            by a disciple of Boisil, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg224" style="text-align: left">224</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg317" style="text-align: left">317</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg318" style="text-align: left">318</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg319" style="text-align: left">319</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            by Fursa, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg173" style="text-align: left">173-177</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            by Sebbi, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg239" style="text-align: left">239</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            by Theodore, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg314" style="text-align: left">314</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            by Tilmon, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg322" style="text-align: left">322</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            by Wilfrid, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg355" style="text-align: left">355</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Vitalian, Pope, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvii" style="text-align: left">xxvii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg002" style="text-align: left">2</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg216" style="text-align: left">216</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his letter to Oswy, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg208" style="text-align: left">208</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg209" style="text-align: left">209</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg210" style="text-align: left">210</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg211" style="text-align: left">211</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            seeks a suitable Archbishop for Canterbury, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg213" style="text-align: left">213</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg214" style="text-align: left">214</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            ordains Theodore, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg215" style="text-align: left">215</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            sends Theodore and Hadrian to Britain, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg357" style="text-align: left">357</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Vitta, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg030" style="text-align: left">30</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Voyage Provision, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">i.e.</span></span>, the Viaticum, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg249" style="text-align: left">249</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg275" style="text-align: left">275</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Vortigern"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Vortigern, or Uurtigern, King of Britain, calls in the Saxons,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg029" style="text-align: left">29</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg095" style="text-align: left">95</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Vulgate, the, quoted, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg080" style="text-align: left">80</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg107" style="text-align: left">107</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg174" style="text-align: left">174</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg209" style="text-align: left">209</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg282" style="text-align: left">282</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg361" style="text-align: left">361-372</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Wagele, perhaps Whalley, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg204" style="text-align: left">204</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Wahlstod"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Wahlstod, Bishop of Hereford, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg379" style="text-align: left">379</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg380" style="text-align: left">380</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Walbottle, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg180" style="text-align: left">180</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Waldhere"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Waldhere, Bishop of London, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg239" style="text-align: left">239</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Wales, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg033" style="text-align: left">33</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Wall, At the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg180" style="text-align: left">180</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg182" style="text-align: left">182</a>.
          </div>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page438">[pg 438]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg438"/>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Walls, Roman, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg012" style="text-align: left">12</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg013" style="text-align: left">13</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg024" style="text-align: left">24</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg025" style="text-align: left">25</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg026" style="text-align: left">26</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg183" style="text-align: left">183</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Wallsend-on-Tyne, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg025" style="text-align: left">25</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Walton, near Newcastle, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg180" style="text-align: left">180</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Wantsum, the River, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg045" style="text-align: left">45</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Wash, the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg003" style="text-align: left">3</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Watling Street, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg018" style="text-align: left">18</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg120" style="text-align: left">120</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Watton"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Watton, Betendune, or Wetadun, Monastery of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg305" style="text-align: left">305</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Watton, Abbess of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Heriburg" style="text-align: left">Heriburg</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Welsh, The, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg007" style="text-align: left">7</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg336" style="text-align: left">336</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Wear, The River, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg271" style="text-align: left">271</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg359" style="text-align: left">359</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Wearmouth-Jarrow"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Wearmouth and Jarrow, Monastery, of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxiii" style="text-align: left">xxiii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxx" style="text-align: left">xxx</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxiii" style="text-align: left">xxxiii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxiv" style="text-align: left">xxxiv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxv" style="text-align: left">xxxv</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg137" style="text-align: left">137</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg167" style="text-align: left">167</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg177" style="text-align: left">177</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg257" style="text-align: left">257</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg284" style="text-align: left">284</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg359" style="text-align: left">359</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            its library, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxv" style="text-align: left">xxxv</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Wearmouth and Jarrow, Abbot of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Benedict-Biscop" style="text-align: left">Benedict</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ceolfrid" style="text-align: left">Ceolfrid</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Cuthbert-Wearmouth" style="text-align: left">Cuthbert</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Huaetbert" style="text-align: left">Huaetbert</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Went, the River, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg189" style="text-align: left">189</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Wergild, the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg267" style="text-align: left">267</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Wessex"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Wessex, History of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxix" style="text-align: left">xxix</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxx" style="text-align: left">xxx</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg003" style="text-align: left">3</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg045" style="text-align: left">45</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg084" style="text-align: left">84</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg096" style="text-align: left">96</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg097" style="text-align: left">97</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg147" style="text-align: left">147</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg148" style="text-align: left">148</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg179" style="text-align: left">179</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg191" style="text-align: left">191</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg206" style="text-align: left">206</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg241" style="text-align: left">241</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg245" style="text-align: left">245</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg247" style="text-align: left">247</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg251" style="text-align: left">251</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg336" style="text-align: left">336</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg342" style="text-align: left">342</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg344" style="text-align: left">344</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg352" style="text-align: left">352</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg380" style="text-align: left">380</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg392" style="text-align: left">392</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            diocese of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxx" style="text-align: left">xxx</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg003" style="text-align: left">3</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg149" style="text-align: left">149</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg150" style="text-align: left">150</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg251" style="text-align: left">251</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg342" style="text-align: left">342</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg343" style="text-align: left">343</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg344" style="text-align: left">344</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg345" style="text-align: left">345</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg350" style="text-align: left">350</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg379" style="text-align: left">379</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg380" style="text-align: left">380</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Wessex, King of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Aescwine" style="text-align: left">Aescwine</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Caedwalla-Wessex" style="text-align: left">Caedwalla</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Caelin" style="text-align: left">Caelin</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Centwine" style="text-align: left">Centwine</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Coinwalch" style="text-align: left">Coinwalch</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Cuichelm-Wessex" style="text-align: left">Cuichelm</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Cuthred" style="text-align: left">Cuthred</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Cynegils" style="text-align: left">Cynegils</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Cyniwulf" style="text-align: left">Cyniwulf</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Edilhart" style="text-align: left">Edilhart</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ini" style="text-align: left">Ini</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Wessex, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Agilbert" style="text-align: left">Agilbert</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Birinus" style="text-align: left">Birinus</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Daniel" style="text-align: left">Daniel</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Haedde" style="text-align: left">Haedde</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Leutherius" style="text-align: left">Leutherius</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Wini" style="text-align: left">Wini</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Westphalia, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg317" style="text-align: left">317</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-West-Saxons"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            West Saxons, called Gewissae or Gewissi, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg030" style="text-align: left">30</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg096" style="text-align: left">96</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg147" style="text-align: left">147</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg148" style="text-align: left">148</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            history and province of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Wessex" style="text-align: left">Wessex</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Wetadun, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Watton" style="text-align: left">Watton</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Whales in Britain, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg005" style="text-align: left">5</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Whalley, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg204" style="text-align: left">204</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Wharfe, The River, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg271" style="text-align: left">271</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Whelock, Abraham, his edition of the <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Ecclesiastical History,”</span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxix" style="text-align: left">xix</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Whitby-Bay"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Whitby, Bay of the Lighthouse or Streanaeshalch, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxix" style="text-align: left">xxix</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg195" style="text-align: left">195</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg275" style="text-align: left">275</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg349" style="text-align: left">349</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            monastery of, built by Hilda, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg190" style="text-align: left">190</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg243" style="text-align: left">243</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg244" style="text-align: left">244</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg270" style="text-align: left">270</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg272" style="text-align: left">272-281</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg286" style="text-align: left">286</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg306" style="text-align: left">306</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg385" style="text-align: left">385</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Synod of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvii" style="text-align: left">xxvii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxviii" style="text-align: left">xxviii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg084" style="text-align: left">84</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg194" style="text-align: left">194</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg195" style="text-align: left">195</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg196" style="text-align: left">196-201</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg350" style="text-align: left">350</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Whitby, Abbess of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Eanfled" style="text-align: left">Eanfled</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Elfled" style="text-align: left">Elfled</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Hilda" style="text-align: left">Hilda</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Whitby-Monk"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Whitby, a monk of, editorial references to his <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Life of Gregory,”</span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg075" style="text-align: left">75</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg190" style="text-align: left">190</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Whitern or White House, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg141" style="text-align: left">141</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg244" style="text-align: left">244</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            diocese of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg381" style="text-align: left">381</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Whitern, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Frithwald" style="text-align: left">Frithwald</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ninian" style="text-align: left">Ninian</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Pechthelm" style="text-align: left">Pechthelm</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Whitsuntide"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Whitsuntide, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxli" style="text-align: left">xli</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg206" style="text-align: left">206</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Whittingham, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg292" style="text-align: left">292</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Wicklow, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg092" style="text-align: left">92</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Wictbert, Irish hermit, his unsuccessful mission to Frisland,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg319" style="text-align: left">319</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg320" style="text-align: left">320</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg323" style="text-align: left">323</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Wictred"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Wictred, King of Kent, son of Egbert, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxix" style="text-align: left">xxix</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxi" style="text-align: left">xxxi</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg287" style="text-align: left">287</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg315" style="text-align: left">315</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg316" style="text-align: left">316</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his sons, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg377" style="text-align: left">377</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg377" style="text-align: left">377</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg386" style="text-align: left">386</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Wighard, a disciple of Gregory's, sent to Rome to be ordained
            Archbishop, dies there, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvii" style="text-align: left">xxvii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg208" style="text-align: left">208</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg210" style="text-align: left">210</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg211" style="text-align: left">211</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg213" style="text-align: left">213</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Wight"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Wight, Isle of, history, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxix" style="text-align: left">xxix</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg003" style="text-align: left">3</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg011" style="text-align: left">11</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg030" style="text-align: left">30</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg245" style="text-align: left">245</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg252" style="text-align: left">252</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg253" style="text-align: left">253</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Christianity introduced into, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg252" style="text-align: left">252</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg253" style="text-align: left">253</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            described, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg253" style="text-align: left">253</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            bishopric of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg380" style="text-align: left">380</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Wight, the Isle of, King of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Arwald" style="text-align: left">Arwald</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Wigton Bay, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg141" style="text-align: left">141</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Wilbert, a boy to whom Bede dictates the last sentences of his
            translations, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxliii" style="text-align: left">xliii</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Wilbrord"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Wilbrord, Missionary, Archbishop of Frisland, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxx" style="text-align: left">xxx</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg143" style="text-align: left">143</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg161" style="text-align: left">161</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg319" style="text-align: left">319</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            account of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg161" style="text-align: left">161</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg320" style="text-align: left">320</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            at Rome, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg323" style="text-align: left">323</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his mission to Frisland, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg320" style="text-align: left">320</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg321" style="text-align: left">321</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg323" style="text-align: left">323</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg351" style="text-align: left">351</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg375" style="text-align: left">375</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            destroys idols and kills the sacred cattle of Fosite, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg323" style="text-align: left">323</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his consecration, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg324" style="text-align: left">324</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            given the name of Clement in religion, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg324" style="text-align: left">324</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his see at Utrecht, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg324" style="text-align: left">324</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his monastery near Trèves, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg324" style="text-align: left">324</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            calendar said to contain an entry by him, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg324" style="text-align: left">324</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            builds St. Saviour's, and rebuilds St. <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page439">[pg 439]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" style="text-align: left" id="Pg439"/> Martin's Church,
            Utrecht, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg324" style="text-align: left">324</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            date of his death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg325" style="text-align: left">325</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Life
            of,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Alcuin" style="text-align: left">Alcuin</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Wilfaraesdun or Wilfar's Hill, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg164" style="text-align: left">164</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Wilfrid-St"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Wilfrid, St., Bishop, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxx" style="text-align: left">xxx</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg137" style="text-align: left">137</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg161" style="text-align: left">161</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg163" style="text-align: left">163</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg227" style="text-align: left">227</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg257" style="text-align: left">257</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg343" style="text-align: left">343</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            account of his life and character, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg347" style="text-align: left">347-357</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his birth and family, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg347" style="text-align: left">347</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            educated at Lindisfarne, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg347" style="text-align: left">347</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            sent to the Court of Oswy, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg347" style="text-align: left">347</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            to Lindisfarne, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg347" style="text-align: left">347</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            resolves to go to Rome, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg347" style="text-align: left">347</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            assisted by Queen Eanfled, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg347" style="text-align: left">347</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg348" style="text-align: left">348</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            starts with Benedict Biscop, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg348" style="text-align: left">348</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            detained at Lyons by Annemundus, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg348" style="text-align: left">348</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            in Rome, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg348" style="text-align: left">348</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg349" style="text-align: left">349</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            on his way home stays at Lyons, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg349" style="text-align: left">349</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his fidelity to Annemundus, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg349" style="text-align: left">349</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            wins the friendship of Alchfrid, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg194" style="text-align: left">194</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg350" style="text-align: left">350</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            given land at Stanford, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg350" style="text-align: left">350</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            made Abbot of Ripon, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg194" style="text-align: left">194</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg350" style="text-align: left">350</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg351" style="text-align: left">351</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            at the Whitby Synod, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvii" style="text-align: left">xxvii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg195" style="text-align: left">195-200</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg217" style="text-align: left">217</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            made Bishop of Northumbria, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvii" style="text-align: left">xxvii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg218" style="text-align: left">218</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg219" style="text-align: left">219</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg350" style="text-align: left">350</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg351" style="text-align: left">351</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg384" style="text-align: left">384</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            consecrated in Gaul by Agilbert, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg206" style="text-align: left">206</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg218" style="text-align: left">218</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg350" style="text-align: left">350</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            superseded by Ceadda, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvii" style="text-align: left">xxvii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg207" style="text-align: left">207</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg351" style="text-align: left">351</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            returns to Britain, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg351" style="text-align: left">351</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            shipwrecked on the coast of Sussex, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg351" style="text-align: left">351</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            discharges episcopal functions for Mercia and Kent, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg218" style="text-align: left">218</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg219" style="text-align: left">219</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg351" style="text-align: left">351</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            restored by Theodore, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg351" style="text-align: left">351</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his relations with Ethelthryth, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg242" style="text-align: left">242</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg260" style="text-align: left">260</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg262" style="text-align: left">262</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his relations with Theodore, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg228" style="text-align: left">228</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg229" style="text-align: left">229</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg231" style="text-align: left">231</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg244" style="text-align: left">244</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg353" style="text-align: left">353</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            represented at Hertford by proxy, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg228" style="text-align: left">228</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his Catholic teaching, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvii" style="text-align: left">xxvii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg208" style="text-align: left">208</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg217" style="text-align: left">217</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            invites Eddi from Kent to teach church singing, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg217" style="text-align: left">217</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            expelled from his see by Egfrid, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg242" style="text-align: left">242</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg243" style="text-align: left">243</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg244" style="text-align: left">244</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg245" style="text-align: left">245</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg267" style="text-align: left">267</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg351" style="text-align: left">351</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg385" style="text-align: left">385</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            foretells the battle of the Trent, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg267" style="text-align: left">267</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            demands an explanation from the King and Archbishop, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg242" style="text-align: left">242</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            goes to Rome to plead his cause, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg243" style="text-align: left">243</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg245" style="text-align: left">245</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg351" style="text-align: left">351</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Ebroin's plot against his life, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg192" style="text-align: left">192</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg351" style="text-align: left">351</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            on his way to Rome driven by the wind to Frisland, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg351" style="text-align: left">351</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            visits Dagobert II of Austrasia, and Perctarit, King of the
            Lombards, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg351" style="text-align: left">351</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            acquitted by Agatho and the Lateran Council, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg352" style="text-align: left">352</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his confession of faith on behalf of the English Church, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg254" style="text-align: left">254</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg352" style="text-align: left">352</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            returns to Britain, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg352" style="text-align: left">352</a>, accused of bribery, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg352" style="text-align: left">352</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            imprisoned at Bromnis, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg352" style="text-align: left">352</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            at Dunbar, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg352" style="text-align: left">352</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            released at Aebba's request, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg260" style="text-align: left">260</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg352" style="text-align: left">352</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            takes refuge in Mercia, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg267" style="text-align: left">267</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg323" style="text-align: left">323</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg352" style="text-align: left">352</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            expelled from Mercia, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg267" style="text-align: left">267</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg352" style="text-align: left">352</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            converts the South Saxons and the Isle of Wight, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg179" style="text-align: left">179</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg245" style="text-align: left">245-248</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg252" style="text-align: left">252</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg352" style="text-align: left">352</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg353" style="text-align: left">353</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            founds the Monastery of Selsey, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg247" style="text-align: left">247</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg345" style="text-align: left">345</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his restoration to York, Hexham, and Ripon, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg243" style="text-align: left">243</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg247" style="text-align: left">247</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg296" style="text-align: left">296</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg353" style="text-align: left">353</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg356" style="text-align: left">356</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            administers Lindisfarne, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg296" style="text-align: left">296</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his second expulsion, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg274" style="text-align: left">274</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg296" style="text-align: left">296</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg323" style="text-align: left">323</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg353" style="text-align: left">353</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            second sojourn in Mercia, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg353" style="text-align: left">353</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            consecrates Oftfor, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg274" style="text-align: left">274</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            consecrates Suidbert, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg323" style="text-align: left">323</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            excommunicated by the Council of Ouestraefelda, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg353" style="text-align: left">353</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            second visit to Frisland, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg161" style="text-align: left">161</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            again goes to Rome to plead his cause, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg353" style="text-align: left">353</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            acquitted by Pope John and the Council, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg353" style="text-align: left">353</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg354" style="text-align: left">354</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            taken ill at Meaux on his way back to Britain, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg354" style="text-align: left">354</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg355" style="text-align: left">355</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his vision, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg355" style="text-align: left">355</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            arrives in Britain, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg355" style="text-align: left">355</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            reconciled to Bertwald, Ethelred and Coenred, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg355" style="text-align: left">355</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg356" style="text-align: left">356</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Aldfrid refuses to receive him, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg356" style="text-align: left">356</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Elfled's influence in his favour, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg189" style="text-align: left">189</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            restored to his bishopric of Hexham by the Synod on the Nidd,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg356" style="text-align: left">356</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            dies at Oundle, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg346" style="text-align: left">346</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg356" style="text-align: left">356</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg391" style="text-align: left">391</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            buried at St. Peter's, Ripon, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg346" style="text-align: left">346</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg356" style="text-align: left">356</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his epitaph, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg356" style="text-align: left">356</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg357" style="text-align: left">357</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            length of his episcopate, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg346" style="text-align: left">346</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his relics, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg346" style="text-align: left">346</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his character, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg347" style="text-align: left">347</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            churches built by him, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg351" style="text-align: left">351</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Life
            of,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Eddi" style="text-align: left">Eddius</a>.
          </div>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page440">[pg 440]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg440"/>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Wilfrid-II"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Wilfrid II, Bishop of York, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg273" style="text-align: left">273</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg346" style="text-align: left">346</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg379" style="text-align: left">379</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg380" style="text-align: left">380</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg381" style="text-align: left">381</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg390" style="text-align: left">390</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            account of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg273" style="text-align: left">273</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            ordained by John, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg312" style="text-align: left">312</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Wilfrid-Worcester"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Wilfrid, Bishop of Worcester, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg379" style="text-align: left">379</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg380" style="text-align: left">380</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Wilgils, father of Wilbrord, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg320" style="text-align: left">320</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            William III, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxix" style="text-align: left">xix</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-William"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            William of Malmesbury, editorial references to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg086" style="text-align: left">86</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg087" style="text-align: left">87</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg125" style="text-align: left">125</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg232" style="text-align: left">232</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg239" style="text-align: left">239</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg287" style="text-align: left">287</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg346" style="text-align: left">346</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg377" style="text-align: left">377</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg392" style="text-align: left">392</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Wiltaburg"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Wiltaburg, Wiltenburg, the Town of the Wilts, or Trajectum, now
            Utrecht, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg324" style="text-align: left">324</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Wiltshire, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg343" style="text-align: left">343</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Wincanheale, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg204" style="text-align: left">204</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Winchester"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Winchester, Venta, or Wintancaestir, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg228" style="text-align: left">228</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            churches at, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg149" style="text-align: left">149</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            diocese of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxx" style="text-align: left">xxx</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg003" style="text-align: left">3</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg148" style="text-align: left">148</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg149" style="text-align: left">149</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg150" style="text-align: left">150</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg251" style="text-align: left">251</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg343" style="text-align: left">343</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg345" style="text-align: left">345</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Winchester, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Daniel" style="text-align: left">Daniel</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Haedde" style="text-align: left">Haedde</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Leutherius" style="text-align: left">Leutherius</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Wini" style="text-align: left">Wini</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Winfrid, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> Boniface.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Wini"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Wini, Bishop of Winchester, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg150" style="text-align: left">150</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg241" style="text-align: left">241</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            consecrates Ceadda, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg207" style="text-align: left">207</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            expelled from Winchester, purchases the bishopric of London,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg150" style="text-align: left">150</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg231" style="text-align: left">231</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            returns to Winchester, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg228" style="text-align: left">228</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Wintancaestir, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Winchester" style="text-align: left">Winchester</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Winter's Tale,
            The,”</span> editorial reference to, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg263" style="text-align: left">263</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Winwaed, Battle of the, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvii" style="text-align: left">xxvii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg185" style="text-align: left">185</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg188" style="text-align: left">188</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg189" style="text-align: left">189</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Winwaed, The River, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg189" style="text-align: left">189</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Witberg, daughter of Anna, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg149" style="text-align: left">149</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Witenagemot, The, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxv" style="text-align: left">xxv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg094" style="text-align: left">94</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg095" style="text-align: left">95</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg116" style="text-align: left">116</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg151" style="text-align: left">151</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg231" style="text-align: left">231</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg242" style="text-align: left">242</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg251" style="text-align: left">251</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg316" style="text-align: left">316</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Woden, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg030" style="text-align: left">30</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            the sons of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg083" style="text-align: left">83</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Wooler, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg119" style="text-align: left">119</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Worcester"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Worcester, diocese of the Hwiccas, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg273" style="text-align: left">273</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg379" style="text-align: left">379</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg380" style="text-align: left">380</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Worcester, Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Bosel" style="text-align: left">Bosel</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Egwin" style="text-align: left">Egwin</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Oftfor" style="text-align: left">Oftfor</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Tatfrid" style="text-align: left">Tatfrid</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Wilfrid-Worcester" style="text-align: left">Wilfrid</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Worcestershire, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg084" style="text-align: left">84</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg379" style="text-align: left">379</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Worr, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Aldwin-Worr" style="text-align: left">Aldwin</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Wulfhere"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Wulfhere, King of Mercia, son of Penda, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxvii" style="text-align: left">xxvii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxviii" style="text-align: left">xxviii</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg149" style="text-align: left">149</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg150" style="text-align: left">150</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg181" style="text-align: left">181</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg218" style="text-align: left">218</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg226" style="text-align: left">226</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg241" style="text-align: left">241</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg261" style="text-align: left">261</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg332" style="text-align: left">332</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            account of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg191" style="text-align: left">191</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            with the aid of Immin, Eafa, and Eadbert, recovers Mercia from
            Oswy, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg191" style="text-align: left">191</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his reign, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg192" style="text-align: left">192</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            his realm, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg225" style="text-align: left">225</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            conquers Lindsey, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg243" style="text-align: left">243</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            sends Jaruman to the East Saxons, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg212" style="text-align: left">212</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg245" style="text-align: left">245</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            brings about the conversion of Ethelwalch, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg245" style="text-align: left">245</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            endows monasteries, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg219" style="text-align: left">219</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg346" style="text-align: left">346</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            invades Northumbria, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg191" style="text-align: left">191</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            defeated by Egfrid, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg191" style="text-align: left">191</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg191" style="text-align: left">191</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg384" style="text-align: left">384</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg385" style="text-align: left">385</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Wulfram"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Wulfram, St., Archbishop of Sens, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg319" style="text-align: left">319</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Wuscfrea, son of Edwin, baptized, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg119" style="text-align: left">119</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            taken by his mother into Kent, and sent into Gaul, where he dies
            in infancy, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg132" style="text-align: left">132</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Wynfrid"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Wynfrid, Bishop of Lichfield, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg192" style="text-align: left">192</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg224" style="text-align: left">224</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg225" style="text-align: left">225</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            account of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg192" style="text-align: left">192</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            deacon under Ceadda, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg225" style="text-align: left">225</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            at the Hertford Synod, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg228" style="text-align: left">228</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            deposed by Theodore, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg231" style="text-align: left">231</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg244" style="text-align: left">244</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            retires to Ad Barvae, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg231" style="text-align: left">231</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            death, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg231" style="text-align: left">231</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Yeavering"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Yeavering or Adgefrin, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg119" style="text-align: left">119</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg120" style="text-align: left">120</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Yellow pest, a bubonic plague, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg203" style="text-align: left">203</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg204" style="text-align: left">204</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-Yffi-Deira"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Yffi, first King of Deira, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg083" style="text-align: left">83</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Yffi, son of Osfrid, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg119" style="text-align: left">119</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg132" style="text-align: left">132</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Index-York"/>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            York, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxxvi" style="text-align: left">xxxvi</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg013" style="text-align: left">13</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg118" style="text-align: left">118</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg131" style="text-align: left">131</a>,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg132" style="text-align: left">132</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg135" style="text-align: left">135</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg244" style="text-align: left">244</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg293" style="text-align: left">293</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg354" style="text-align: left">354</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            diocese of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pgxxv" style="text-align: left">xxv</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg065" style="text-align: left">65</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg066" style="text-align: left">66</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg243" style="text-align: left">243</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg351" style="text-align: left">351</a> n.;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Cathedral, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg119" style="text-align: left">119</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            York, Archbishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Egbert-York" style="text-align: left">Egbert</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Paulinus-York" style="text-align: left">Paulinus</a>;
          </div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 2.00em">
            Bishop of, <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-style: italic">see</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Bosa" style="text-align: left">Bosa</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Ceadda" style="text-align: left">Ceadda</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-John-Beverley" style="text-align: left">John</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Wilfrid-St" style="text-align: left">Wilfrid</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Index-Wilfrid-II" style="text-align: left">Wilfrid II</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Yorkshire, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg003" style="text-align: left">3</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg118" style="text-align: left">118</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg204" style="text-align: left">204</a> n., <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg305" style="text-align: left">305</a> n.,
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg342" style="text-align: left">342</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Ythancaestir, Monastery of, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg183" style="text-align: left">183</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg187" style="text-align: left">187</a>.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Zacharias, Pope, letter to Boniface, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg087" style="text-align: left">87</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Zeuss, his <span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">“Die
            Deutschen und die Nachbarstämme,”</span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg317" style="text-align: left">317</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em; margin-top: 1.00em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
            Zozimus, Pope, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg021" style="text-align: left">21</a> n.
          </div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<hr class="doublepage"/>
<div class="tei tei-back" style="margin-bottom: 2.00em; margin-top: 6.00em">
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 5.00em; margin-top: 5.00em" id="footnotes">
<a id="toc305"/> <a id="pdf306"/>
<h1 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 3.46em; margin-top: 3.46em">
<span style="font-size: 173%">Footnotes</span></h1>
<dl class="tei tei-list-footnotes">
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1" id="note_1" class="pginternal">1.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The St. Gallen MS. (ninth century)
          has, however, <span class="tei tei-q">“VII Id. Mai.”</span> Messrs.
          Mayor and Lumby, adopting this reading, place his death as late as
          742, in which year the eve of Ascension Day fell on May 9th. For
          their argument, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> Mayor and Lumby, pp. 401,
          402.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_2" id="note_2" class="pginternal">2.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The phrase is the present Bishop of
          Oxford's in <span class="tei tei-q">“Studies in the Christian
          Character.”</span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_3" id="note_3" class="pginternal">3.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Stevenson, <span class="tei tei-q">“Church Historians,”</span> vol. i.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_4" id="note_4" class="pginternal">4.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">From Easter to Whitsuntide.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_5" id="note_5" class="pginternal">5.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Rogation Wednesday.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_6" id="note_6" class="pginternal">6.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">King of Northumbria, cf. V, 23. He
          succeeded Osric, 729 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span> In a revolt he was
          forcibly tonsured, 731, but restored. He voluntarily became a monk
          in Lindisfarne in 737. The fact that Bede submitted the
          Ecclesiastical History to him for revision bears witness to his
          piety and learning.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_7" id="note_7" class="pginternal">7.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Albinus, the first English abbot of
          the monastery of SS. Peter and Paul at Canterbury, succeeded
          Hadrian in 709 or 710. On his scholarship, cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XX">V, 20</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_8" id="note_8" class="pginternal">8.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Theodore, the great archbishop, noted
          for his organization of the English Church and his services to
          education, consecrated in 668, at the age of sixty-five, by Pope
          Vitalian, on the recommendation of Hadrian, who had himself twice
          declined the office of archbishop. Theodore was a native of Tarsus,
          in Cilicia, a man of great learning and scholarly attainments. Cf.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_I">IV, 1</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_9" id="note_9" class="pginternal">9.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Hadrian (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
          previous note, cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_I">IV, 1</a>), an African by birth, sent to England by
          Pope Vitalian along with Theodore, became Abbot of SS. Peter and
          Paul, Canterbury. He co-operated with Theodore in his educational
          work.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_10" id="note_10" class="pginternal">10.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A presbyter of London, afterwards
          Archbishop of Canterbury, 735. Received the <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="la"><span style="font-style: italic">pallium</span></span> (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> I,
          27, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg054">54</a>, note) in
          736.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_11" id="note_11" class="pginternal">11.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Gregory I (the Great), who sent the
          Roman mission to England.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_12" id="note_12" class="pginternal">12.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Gregory II, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
          Plummer <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad loc.</span></span> for arguments showing
          conclusively that Gregory III cannot be meant.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_13" id="note_13" class="pginternal">13.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XVI">IV, 16</a>, and <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XVIII">V, 18</a>. In <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIII">V, 23</a> he is more accurately described as
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Ventanus antistes.”</span> He was
          consecrated Bishop of Winchester when the West Saxon bishopric was
          divided in 705; and his diocese comprised only the smaller part of
          Wessex. He was the friend and counsellor of St. Boniface.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_14" id="note_14" class="pginternal">14.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Bishop of the East Saxons, cf.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXI">III, 21</a>
          foll.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_15" id="note_15" class="pginternal">15.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">St. Chad, Bishop of the Northumbrians,
          afterwards of Lichfield; brother of Cedd: <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> III,
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXIII">23</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXVIII">28</a>; IV, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_II">2</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_III">3</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XIX">V, 19</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_16" id="note_16" class="pginternal">16.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Lastingham, near Pickering in
          Yorkshire N.R., <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXIII">III, 23</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_17" id="note_17" class="pginternal">17.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Nothing further is known of him.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_18" id="note_18" class="pginternal">18.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The district to the north of the
          Wash.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_19" id="note_19" class="pginternal">19.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Bishop of Sidnacester, in the province
          of Lindsey. He died in 732: <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XII">IV, 12</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIII">V, 23</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_20" id="note_20" class="pginternal">20.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The saint and hermit who was for two
          years Bishop of Lindisfarne, 685-687: <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXVI">IV, 26-32</a>.
          Bede wrote his life both in prose and verse.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_21" id="note_21" class="pginternal">21.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Holy Island, off the coast of
          Northumberland. Aidan chose it as the place of his see and
          monastery in 635: <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_III">III, 3</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_22" id="note_22" class="pginternal">22.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This total varies in different
          authors. The first few pages of Bede are to a great extent copied
          out of Pliny, Solinus, Orosius, and Gildas.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_23" id="note_23" class="pginternal">23.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Richborough, Kent.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_24" id="note_24" class="pginternal">24.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Boulogne.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_25" id="note_25" class="pginternal">25.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. Caes., B.G., <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">passim</span></span>;
          Verg., Aen., VIII, 727.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_26" id="note_26" class="pginternal">26.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">In his Hexameron.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_27" id="note_27" class="pginternal">27.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Latin is included as being the
          ecclesiastical language common to all. Bede does not imply that
          there was a Latin-speaking race still in the island.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_28" id="note_28" class="pginternal">28.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">In Caesar's time, the whole district
          lying along the north-western coast of Gaul, afterwards narrowed
          down to the modern Brittany. That the Britons (or Brythons) came
          from Gaul is doubtless a fact. Another branch of the Celtic race,
          the Goidels or Gaels, appears to have been in possession in Britain
          before them.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_29" id="note_29" class="pginternal">29.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">By Scythia Bede means Scandinavia. He
          only mentions this account as a tradition. The problem of the Picts
          has not been solved yet. According to one view, they belonged to
          the pre-Aryan inhabitants of Britain, pushed westward and northward
          by the Celtic invaders. In Scotland they held their own for a
          considerable time in a wide tract of country, and they may have to
          some extent amalgamated with the Celts who dispossessed them
          (Rhŷs). Others regard them as Celts of the same branch as Welsh,
          Cornish, and Britons, being probably nearest to Cornish. The
          absence of all but the scantiest remains of their language makes
          the question of their origin one of great difficulty.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_30" id="note_30" class="pginternal">30.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The legend is an attempt to account
          for the law of Pictish succession, which was vested in the mother,
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> Rhŷs, <span class="tei tei-q">“Celtic Britain,”</span> pp. 170-171.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_31" id="note_31" class="pginternal">31.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-q">“Dal,”</span>
          a division or part, is common in Irish names. Dalriada was a
          district in the north-eastern part of Ulster. From there, a tribe
          of Scots (a Celtic race who settled in Ireland at some unknown
          period) came to Kintyre and spread along the coasts of Argyll,
          which took from them the name of Dalriada (probably <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">circ.</span></span>
          500 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>). They brought the
          Christian religion with them. Bede follows that version of the
          legend which makes Cairbre Riada, the eponymous hero of the Irish
          Dalriada (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">circ.</span></span> 200 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>), himself found the
          colony in Scotland.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_32" id="note_32" class="pginternal">32.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Dumbarton; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.
          infra</span></span> c. 12, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg024">24</a> and note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_33" id="note_33" class="pginternal">33.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Caesar's invasion took place
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.u.c.</span></span> 699 and 700;
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">b.c.</span></span> 55 and 54.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_34" id="note_34" class="pginternal">34.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. Caes., B.G., V, 11, 18 ff. A
          powerful British chief. His territory lay north and north-east of
          the Thames, roughly comprising Hertfordshire, Buckinghamshire, and
          Berkshire, but the exact limits are uncertain. His people were the
          Catuvellauni (the name is Gaulish in form).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_35" id="note_35" class="pginternal">35.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. Caes., B.G., V, 20. The
          Trinovantes occupied Essex and part of Middlesex.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_36" id="note_36" class="pginternal">36.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Variations of this name given by
          ancient authors are Andragius and Androgorius. Caesar calls him
          Mandubracius.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_37" id="note_37" class="pginternal">37.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The position of this place is
          unknown.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_38" id="note_38" class="pginternal">38.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Claudius came to Britain <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.u.c.</span></span> 796, 43
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_39" id="note_39" class="pginternal">39.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">He can only have done so in name; it
          was probably Agricola who first conquered the Orkneys. Cf. Tac.,
          Agric., 10.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_40" id="note_40" class="pginternal">40.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. Tac., Agric., 13.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_41" id="note_41" class="pginternal">41.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Marcus Antoninus Verus, commonly
          called Marcus Aurelius, succeeded in 161 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span> His colleague in the
          empire was his adopted brother, Lucius Verus, whose full adoptive
          name was Lucius Aurelius Antoninus Verus Commodus. He died in 169.
          Eleutherus became Pope between 171 and 177. Bede's chronology is
          therefore wrong.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_42" id="note_42" class="pginternal">42.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Most modern authorities consider the
          story fabulous. But cf. Bright, <span class="tei tei-q">“Early
          English Church History,”</span> pp. 3-5.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_43" id="note_43" class="pginternal">43.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Severus succeeded in 193 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span> He died in 211.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_44" id="note_44" class="pginternal">44.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This is the earthwork which runs
          parallel to the wall of Hadrian, between the Solway and the Tyne,
          at an interval of from 30 to 1,300 yards from it. Its origin and
          purpose are doubtful. Ancient authorities afford conflicting
          evidence with regard to the Roman walls in Britain. Modern research
          seems to show that Severus built no wall or rampart, though some
          ancient historians assert that he did (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
          Haverfield, quoted by Plummer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          loc.</span></span>; cf. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">infra</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XII">12</a> and note).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_45" id="note_45" class="pginternal">45.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Bassianus Antoninus, surnamed
          Caracalla. Geta was murdered by Caracalla.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_46" id="note_46" class="pginternal">46.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Diocletian succeeded in 284.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_47" id="note_47" class="pginternal">47.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Carausius was a native of Menapia, in
          Belgium, appointed to command the Roman fleet stationed at Boulogne
          to guard the coasts. He took the fleet with him when he usurped
          imperial authority in Britain. Maximian, failing to reduce him,
          recognized his authority and gave him the title of Augustus. He
          governed vigorously and prosperously.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_48" id="note_48" class="pginternal">48.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Allectus was a follower of Carausius.
          His revolt was apparently supported by the independent tribes,
          probably Caledonians.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_49" id="note_49" class="pginternal">49.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Asclepiodotus was serving under
          Constantius Chlorus (one of the reigning Caesars), who sailed to
          Britain and marched against Allectus.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_50" id="note_50" class="pginternal">50.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The statement that the Diocletian
          persecution extended to Britain rests on no trustworthy evidence at
          all. Yet though the time assigned is probably wrong, there seems to
          be no reason to doubt the existence of the British Protomartyr. The
          story rests upon a local tradition traceable up to the visit of
          Germanus in 429 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.
          infra</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XVIII">18</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_51" id="note_51" class="pginternal">51.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Venantius Fortunatus, a Christian
          poet, Bishop of Poitiers, b. 530 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span> He was the last Latin
          poet of any note in Gaul.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_52" id="note_52" class="pginternal">52.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">In the lives of St. Alban (all later
          than Bede) this clerk is called St. Amphibalus, a name probably
          invented from his cloak (<span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="la"><span style="font-style: italic">amphibalus</span></span>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_53" id="note_53" class="pginternal">53.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The text of this passage is probably
          corrupt, but all the MSS. agree. I believe the above gives the
          intended meaning.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_54" id="note_54" class="pginternal">54.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">There is again probably some confusion
          in the text.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_55" id="note_55" class="pginternal">55.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Now St. Albans in Hertfordshire, on
          the Watling Street, hence probably the name, Vaeclingacaestir.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_56" id="note_56" class="pginternal">56.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The place was afterwards called
          Holmhurst. The church mentioned by Bede was superseded by the
          monastery of St. Alban, the foundation of which is attributed to
          Offa, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">circ.</span></span> 793 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span> Certain extraordinary
          privileges were granted to it, and its abbot obtained a superiority
          over all other English abbots (Dugdale, <span class="tei tei-q">“Monasticon”</span>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_57" id="note_57" class="pginternal">57.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The evidence for their martyrdom is
          very doubtful.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_58" id="note_58" class="pginternal">58.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Caerleon-on-Usk, the headquarters of
          the Second legion, is here meant (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
          Merivale, H.R., vi, 248), though the name was also applied to
          Chester, seat of the Twentieth legion (cf. II, 2, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg087">87</a>, <span class="tei tei-q">“civitas legionum”</span>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_59" id="note_59" class="pginternal">59.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Constantine the Great. For the
          legality of the marriage, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> Dict. of Christian Biography,
          article <span class="tei tei-q">“Helena.”</span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_60" id="note_60" class="pginternal">60.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The First General Council, 325
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span> It asserted the
          doctrine of the ὁμοούσιον against Arius. For a short account of the
          heresy, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> Gore, Bampton Lectures, pp.
          89-92. All the evidence goes to show that this heresy affected
          Britain much less than Bede, on the authority of Gildas, here
          implies.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_61" id="note_61" class="pginternal">61.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Valens died 378.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_62" id="note_62" class="pginternal">62.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Another of the insular usurpers (cf.
          c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_VI">6</a>). He had
          served under the elder Theodosius in Britain. He revolted from
          Rome, successfully repressed incursions of Picts and Scots, then
          crossed to Gaul, where he maintained himself for four years, but
          was killed by the Emperor, the younger Theodosius, at Aquileia, in
          388.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_63" id="note_63" class="pginternal">63.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The real date is 395.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_64" id="note_64" class="pginternal">64.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pelagius, the founder of the heresy
          known as Pelagianism, was probably born in 370 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>, and is said to have
          been a Briton, but the tradition that his real name was Morgan
          (Marigena, Graecised Πελάγιος), and that he was a native of Bangor,
          rests on very doubtful authority. His great opponent, St.
          Augustine, speaks of him as a good and holy man; later slanders are
          to be attributed to Jerome's abusive language. The cardinal point
          in his doctrine is his denial of original sin, involving a too
          great reliance on the human will in achieving holiness, and a
          limitation of the action of the grace of God.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_65" id="note_65" class="pginternal">65.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Julianus of Campania is regarded as
          the founder of semi-Pelagianism, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">i.e.</span></span>,
          an intermediate position between the orthodox view and the heresy
          of Pelagius. He was Bishop of Eclanum, near Beneventum, and was
          along with seventeen other Italian bishops deposed in 418
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span> for refusing to sign
          the circular letter of Pope Zosimus condemning the heresy.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_66" id="note_66" class="pginternal">66.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A native of Aquitaine, born probably
          about 403 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>, a strong opponent of
          the Pelagians. It is uncertain whether he was in Holy Orders or
          not. He wrote in prose and verse; his longest poem is called
          <span class="tei tei-q">“De Ingratis”</span> (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">i.e.</span></span>,
          opponents of the grace of God). His best known work is a Chronicle,
          not to be confused with the shorter chronicle of Prosper Tiro.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_67" id="note_67" class="pginternal">67.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Bede includes elegiacs under this
          term, cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_VIII">V,
          8</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_68" id="note_68" class="pginternal">68.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The date of Honorius is correct, but
          the invasion of Alaric is put a year too late, if Bede refers to
          the first siege of Rome, in 408.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_69" id="note_69" class="pginternal">69.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The British army, alarmed by the
          inroads of barbarians, and actuated by a spirit of revolt against
          Roman authority, set up three local emperors in rapid succession:
          Marcus, Gratian, and Constantine. The first two they summarily
          deposed and killed, but Constantine by a great victory made himself
          master of Gaul and Britain and extorted from the Emperor Honorius a
          share in the Imperial authority. Meanwhile, the Britons expelled
          the few remaining Roman officials, and Honorius avenged himself on
          Constantine for the loss of Britain in the manner described in the
          text.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_70" id="note_70" class="pginternal">70.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A Roman general, afterwards associated
          with Honorius in the empire for a few months.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_71" id="note_71" class="pginternal">71.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Gerontius (Welsh <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="cy"><span style="font-style: italic">Geraint</span></span>, akin to Irish
          <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="ga"><span style="font-style: italic">Gerat</span></span> or <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="ga"><span style="font-style: italic">Gerait</span></span>, a champion), was a
          Briton, one of Constantine's generals. Turning against his master,
          he invited the Germans to invade Gaul and Britain, probably
          intending to secure Britain for himself. But his own men conspired
          against him and he died by his own hand.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_72" id="note_72" class="pginternal">72.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Rome was taken 1163 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.u.c.</span></span>; 410 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_73" id="note_73" class="pginternal">73.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Possibly <span class="tei tei-q">“light-houses.”</span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_74" id="note_74" class="pginternal">74.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Probably Inchkeith in the Forth. The
          Irish called the Firth of Forth the <span class="tei tei-q">“Sea of
          Giudan”</span> (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> Reeves' <span class="tei tei-q">“Culdees,”</span> p. 124). But Professor Rhŷs is
          inclined to think that Bede has confused the island Giudi with Urbs
          Giudi, which may perhaps be identified with the Urbs Iudeu of
          Nennius, probably either Carriden or Edinburgh (Rhŷs, <span class="tei tei-q">“Celtic Britain”</span>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_75" id="note_75" class="pginternal">75.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Alcluith is the Welsh name (Ail = a
          rock). The Goidels called it Dúnbrettan = the fortress of the
          Britons. Hence its modern name, Dumbarton. The river is, of course,
          the Clyde.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_76" id="note_76" class="pginternal">76.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This is the earthen rampart, about
          thirty-five miles in length, between the Clyde and the Forth, now
          attributed to Antoninus Pius. Little is known about it, and it is
          probable that it was soon abandoned.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_77" id="note_77" class="pginternal">77.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Abercorn, a village on the south bank
          of the Firth of Forth.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_78" id="note_78" class="pginternal">78.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The name is probably Celtic
          (Goidelic), though, if the view which regards the Picts as a
          non-Celtic people be correct, it may show traces of Pictish
          influence. It seems to be connected with the Latin term
          <span class="tei tei-q">“penna valli”</span> = wing of
          (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">i.e.</span></span>, pinnacle or turret at end
          of) the <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="la"><span style="font-style: italic">vallum</span></span>. Readers
          of Scott's <span class="tei tei-q">“Antiquary”</span> will remember
          the celebrated dispute with regard to this word. The Anglian
          <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Penneltun</span></span> is derived from the
          Goidelic name.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_79" id="note_79" class="pginternal">79.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This probably refers to the wall now
          attributed to Hadrian (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_V">5</a> note). It ran for a distance of about
          eighty-five miles from Bowness-on-Solway to Wallsend-on-Tyne.
          Bede's authorities are Orosius and Gildas. The accounts he gives
          here and in c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_V">5</a>
          are an attempt to explain the difficulties and conflicting evidence
          with regard to these walls.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_80" id="note_80" class="pginternal">80.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">In 431 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span> There is much
          confusion with regard to the mission of Palladius. According to
          later accounts, he was an unsuccessful forerunner of St. Patrick,
          but Bede here, following Prosper of Aquitaine, represents the Irish
          (Scotti) as in part already Christian. The origin of Irish
          Christianity is very obscure, and some have even doubted the
          existence of St. Patrick. Bede only mentions him once, viz., in the
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Martyrology,”</span> which has been
          largely interpolated, and is, perhaps, not his genuine work. St.
          Patrick's latest biographer, Professor Bury, has, however, clearly
          established a certain amount of fact underlying much legendary
          matter. Some later authorities represent Palladius as preaching to
          the Scots (in the modern sense) and Patrick to the Irish.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_81" id="note_81" class="pginternal">81.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The great Roman general who preserved
          the Western Empire against the invasions of the barbarians for many
          years. He was assassinated by Valentinian in 454 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_82" id="note_82" class="pginternal">82.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Really two years before, 444
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_83" id="note_83" class="pginternal">83.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Though he is the subject of many
          legends, Vortigern is doubtless a historical figure, a ruler of
          south-eastern Britain. Bede's form of the name, Uurtigernus, is
          right. It is a British word, meaning <span class="tei tei-q">“supreme lord”</span> (Rhŷs).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_84" id="note_84" class="pginternal">84.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The date of Marcian's succession is
          450.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_85" id="note_85" class="pginternal">85.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Bede only professes to give the date
          of the invasion approximately: cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXIV">V, 24</a> (<span class="tei tei-q">“quorum
          tempore”</span>), <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XXIII">I, 23</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XIV">II, 14</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIII">V, 23</a> (<span class="tei tei-q">“circiter”</span>), calculating in round numbers
          apparently. He refers here to their first settlement, which, of
          course, does not preclude earlier attacks.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_86" id="note_86" class="pginternal">86.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span>, Vortigern.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_87" id="note_87" class="pginternal">87.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Anglia</span></span> was believed to be
          derived from <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Angulus</span></span>. The country is the
          modern Schleswig, which the Angles appear to have almost entirely
          evacuated. For the Continental Saxons, cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_IX">V, 9</a>. It has been
          supposed that the Jutes came from Jutland, where, at a later
          period, they mingled with the Danes (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ibid.</span></span>),
          but this is now regarded as doubtful.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_88" id="note_88" class="pginternal">88.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">At Aylesford, in Kent. Horsted is the
          traditional burial-place of Horsa.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_89" id="note_89" class="pginternal">89.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span>, in Thanet.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_90" id="note_90" class="pginternal">90.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The most probable view is that he was
          the last of those Romans who usurped imperial authority in Britain
          (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span> cc. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_VI">6</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_IX">9</a>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_91" id="note_91" class="pginternal">91.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The identification of this place with
          Badbury, in Dorsetshire (Guest, followed by Freeman and Green)
          seems to be disproved (W. H. Stevenson, in the <span class="tei tei-q">“English Historical Review,”</span> xvii, pp. 633,
          634). The locality is quite uncertain; Skene actually places it
          near Linlithgow. According to Bede's reckoning the date of the
          battle would be 493 approximately. The <span class="tei tei-q">“Annales Cambriae”</span> give 516. For a full
          discussion of the question, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> Plummer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad loc.</span></span>
          Cf. also Mr. Stevenson's article.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_92" id="note_92" class="pginternal">92.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Nothing more is known of them.
          Pelagius left Britain in early life and did not himself spread his
          heresy there.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_93" id="note_93" class="pginternal">93.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The life of Germanus was written by
          Constantius, a priest of Lyons, who is Bede's authority for cc.
          17-21. According to him, these bishops were sent to Britain by a
          Gallican Synod. Prosper of Aquitaine attributes the origin of the
          mission to Pope Celestine, <span class="tei tei-q">“acting on the
          advice of the deacon Palladius”</span> (probably the missionary to
          the Irish mentioned c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XIII">13</a>). The two statements are not irreconcilable
          (cf. Bright, p. 18). There are churches dedicated to SS. Germanus
          and Lupus in Wales and Cornwall. Both had been trained in the
          school of Lérins, a monastery in the group of islands off the coast
          at Cannes.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_94" id="note_94" class="pginternal">94.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This conference is said to have been
          held at Verulam.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_95" id="note_95" class="pginternal">95.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Bede's authority, Constantius, shows
          here the first trace of any acquaintance of early historians with
          the story of St. Alban. The last sentence is somewhat obscure.
          Probably the idea is that the blood of the martyrs continues to cry
          aloud for vengeance.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_96" id="note_96" class="pginternal">96.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Reading <span class="tei tei-q">“reserato.”</span> The reading <span class="tei tei-q">“reservato”</span> is perhaps easier and has some MS.
          authority.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_97" id="note_97" class="pginternal">97.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Reading <span class="tei tei-q">“castitatis,”</span> from which it is difficult to
          extract any meaning. The above strains the Latin unduly.
          Constantius has <span class="tei tei-q">“castrorum,”</span> which
          gives a better sense.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_98" id="note_98" class="pginternal">98.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Maes-y-Garmon (<span class="tei tei-q">“The Field of Germanus”</span>), near Mold, in
          Flintshire, has been fixed upon as the scene of the Hallelujah
          Victory, and the river in which the army was baptized is said to be
          the Alyn (Ussher, <span class="tei tei-q">“Antiqq.”</span>). The
          story is generally regarded as legendary.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_99" id="note_99" class="pginternal">99.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Thirteenth bishop of Trèves. This
          account sums up nearly all that is known of him.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_100" id="note_100" class="pginternal">100.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This second voyage of St. Germanus is
          supposed to have taken place about eighteen years after the first,
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">i.e.</span></span>, in 447.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_101" id="note_101" class="pginternal">101.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The Armoricans had revolted, and
          Aetius (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XIII">13</a> and note) had
          enlisted the services of the Alani against them. Germanus, who had
          at one time been duke of the Armoricans, went to the Imperial Court
          at Ravenna to intercede for them.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_102" id="note_102" class="pginternal">102.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Really the fifth (16th March, 455
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>). Romulus Augustulus
          is usually regarded as the last emperor of the west. He was
          overthrown in 476 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_103" id="note_103" class="pginternal">103.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The British historian, author of the
          <span class="tei tei-q">“De Excidio Liber Querulus,”</span> so
          called from the historian's denunciations of the sins of the
          Britons. He himself tells us that he was born in the year of the
          battle of Badon Hill (Mons Badonicus), and that he wrote his
          History forty-four years after that date. According to Bede (cf. c.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XV">15</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          init.</span></span>, and c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XVI">16</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad fin.</span></span>) this would place his
          birth approximately in the year 493, but see note on c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XVI">16</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_104" id="note_104" class="pginternal">104.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Gregory the Great. Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Preface">Preface</a>. Bede places the date of
          his accession a year too late as well as that of his death
          (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_I">II, 1</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          init.</span></span>, but in the same chapter he rightly places his
          death in the second year of Phocas, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">i.e.</span></span>,
          604).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_105" id="note_105" class="pginternal">105.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Augustine was prior of St. Gregory's
          Monastery dedicated to St. Andrew in Rome.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_106" id="note_106" class="pginternal">106.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. IV, 5, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg227">227</a>, note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_107" id="note_107" class="pginternal">107.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This is a mistake. Aetherius was
          archbishop of Lyons. Vergilius was archbishop of Arles. The letter
          given here, however, is the letter sent to Aetherius. Similar
          letters were despatched to other bishops at this time; among them
          one to Vergilius of Arles.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_108" id="note_108" class="pginternal">108.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A presbyter sent into Gaul by Gregory
          in 595 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span> to administer the
          little patrimony of St. Peter in Gaul, to collect its revenues and
          to invest them in raiment for the poor, or in English slave lads to
          serve in the monasteries and receive a Christian education.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_109" id="note_109" class="pginternal">109.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ethelbert was the third Bretwalda or
          dominant king. He had established a practical hegemony over the
          East Anglians, the Mercians of the Trent Valley, the South Saxons,
          East Saxons, and even the West Saxons (cf. II, 5, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg094">94</a>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_110" id="note_110" class="pginternal">110.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Families, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">i.e.</span></span>,
          <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">hides</span></span>. The hide, probably, was
          as much land as would support a family, hence the extent must have
          varied with the different conditions in different parts of the
          country.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_111" id="note_111" class="pginternal">111.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">In Bede's time Thanet was divided from
          the rest of Kent by a broad channel called the Wantsum, now partly
          represented by the River Stour.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_112" id="note_112" class="pginternal">112.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The conjecture that they landed at
          Ebbsfleet, which is also traditionally regarded as the
          landing-place of Hengist, has been generally adopted. Other
          possible landing-places are Stonar and Richborough. For a full
          discussion of the question, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“The
          Mission of St. Augustine,”</span> ed. Rev. A. T. Mason, D.D.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_113" id="note_113" class="pginternal">113.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">It has been supposed, on the strength
          of this passage, that the speech of the Franks and the English was
          still mutually intelligible. This is supported by a statement of
          Gregory (letter to Theoderic and Theodebert) that he had desired
          Augustine to take some Frankish priests with him. It is assumed
          that these priests were the interpreters. On the other hand, in
          view of the fact that only fifty years later we find the language
          of the Franks regarded in England as a <span class="tei tei-q">“barbara loquella”</span> (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_VII">III, 7</a>), it has been inferred that the
          interpreters were men who had acquired a knowledge of the dialect
          of Kent through commerce or otherwise.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_114" id="note_114" class="pginternal">114.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Daughter of Charibert, king of
          Paris.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_115" id="note_115" class="pginternal">115.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Said (on doubtful authority) to have
          been bishop of Senlis. He acted as the queen's private chaplain.
          There is nothing to show that either he or Bertha attempted to
          spread their religion in England, though probably their influence
          may not have been without effect on Ethelbert.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_116" id="note_116" class="pginternal">116.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The old Roman town of Doruvernis,
          which is the name Bede gives to it throughout the History.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_117" id="note_117" class="pginternal">117.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">St. Martin was regarded with special
          reverence in Britain and Ireland. Possibly some of the earliest
          missionaries may have been his disciples, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">e.g.</span></span>,
          St. Ninian and St. Patrick. The Roman church of St. Martin at
          Canterbury has been frequently altered and partly rebuilt, so that
          <span class="tei tei-q">“small portions only of the Roman walls
          remain. Roman bricks are used as old materials in the parts
          rebuilt”</span> (Parker).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_118" id="note_118" class="pginternal">118.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Augustine was not consecrated as
          archbishop either of London or Canterbury, but by the general title
          of <span class="tei tei-q">“Archbishop of the English.”</span>
          According to Gregory's original scheme, London, not Canterbury, was
          to have been the seat of the primacy of southern England (cf. c.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XXIX">29</a>), London and
          York being doubtless the most important cities of south and north
          known to him from their history during the Roman occupation. But
          Christianity was not permanently established in London till it was
          too late to remove the see from Canterbury, which would obviously
          commend itself to Augustine as the most suitable place to be the
          metropolitan city.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_119" id="note_119" class="pginternal">119.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">For Aetherius read Vergilius
          (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XXIV">24</a>, note). <span class="tei tei-q">“The occupant of the see of Arles was in some sense
          primate of France at this time, and, as such, Vergilius received
          the <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="la"><span style="font-style: italic">pallium</span></span> and the
          papal vice-gerentship in the kingdom of Childebert”</span> (Dict.
          Christ. Biog.).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_120" id="note_120" class="pginternal">120.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">He succeeded Augustine as archbishop.
          For his history, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> II, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_VI">6</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_VII">7</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_121" id="note_121" class="pginternal">121.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">infra</span></span>
          c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XXXIII">33</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_122" id="note_122" class="pginternal">122.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span>, those in minor orders; all
          below the subdiaconate.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_123" id="note_123" class="pginternal">123.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">St. Luke, xi, 41. <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="la"><span style="font-style: italic">Quod superest</span></span> (Vulgate) = πλήν
          (R.V.,<span class="tei tei-q">“Howbeit”</span>; A.V., <span class="tei tei-q">“But rather”</span>), adverbial. Gregory takes it to
          mean <span class="tei tei-q">“what is over.”</span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_124" id="note_124" class="pginternal">124.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Augustine must have observed these
          differences of ritual as he travelled through Gaul. Presumably also
          he found the Gallic use adopted at St. Martin's, Canterbury, by
          Liudhard. Dr. Bright summarizes these differences, <span class="tei tei-q">“Early English Church History,”</span> p. 64.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_125" id="note_125" class="pginternal">125.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Reading <span class="tei tei-q">“fratris et sororis”</span> (for <span class="tei tei-q">“frater et soror”</span>), as the sense requires, but
          there is no MS. authority for the change.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_126" id="note_126" class="pginternal">126.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The text of this passage is corrupt,
          but no very satisfactory emendations have been suggested.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_127" id="note_127" class="pginternal">127.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="la"><span style="font-style: italic">Pallium</span></span> is a long strip of fine
          cloth ornamented with crosses. It is made from wool of lambs reared
          in the convent of St. Agnes at Rome, and is laid for a night on the
          tomb of St. Peter. It is worn passing over the shoulders, with the
          ends hanging down in front and behind, somewhat in the form of the
          letter Y. (The form has varied at different times.) In the east it
          is called <span class="tei tei-q">“omophorion:”</span> the bishops
          wear it during the celebration of the Eucharist. It originally
          formed part of the imperial habit and was granted by the emperor as
          a special mark of honour. Afterwards the pope claimed the exclusive
          right of bestowing it, and its possession became restricted to
          metropolitans, and was considered necessary for the exercise of
          their functions.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_128" id="note_128" class="pginternal">128.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Deut., xxiii, 25.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_129" id="note_129" class="pginternal">129.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The reference may be to the third
          General Council held at Ephesus in 431 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>, at which the rule
          was laid down <span class="tei tei-q">“that no bishop may act in
          any province which has not always been subject to him.”</span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_130" id="note_130" class="pginternal">130.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This is Bede's attempt to reconcile
          the discrepancy created by his mistake in cc. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XXIV">24</a> and <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XXVII">27</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_131" id="note_131" class="pginternal">131.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Mellitus was consecrated Bishop of
          London in 604, and succeeded Laurentius in the see of Canterbury in
          619. Justus was consecrated Bishop of Rochester in 604, and
          succeeded Mellitus as Primate in 624 (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_III">II, 3</a>, foll.).
          Paulinus was the great missionary bishop of the Northumbrians
          (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_IX">II, 9</a>, foll.). Rufinianus was the third
          abbot of St. Augustine's monastery (SS. Peter and Paul).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_132" id="note_132" class="pginternal">132.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XXVII">27</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad init.</span></span>, note. Gregory's
          symmetrical scheme was never carried out, and it was not till 735
          that York became a metropolitan see.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_133" id="note_133" class="pginternal">133.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The date is obviously wrong, as it
          makes this letter earlier than that in c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XXIX">29</a>. The name of the
          month is omitted in two of the oldest MSS. A satisfactory
          emendation (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> Plummer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          loc.</span></span>) is <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Augustarum</span></span> (for <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Juliarum</span></span>), the last month in
          Maurice's reign (XV Kal. Aug., <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">i.e.</span></span>
          18th July).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_134" id="note_134" class="pginternal">134.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">St. Luke, x, 17-20.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_135" id="note_135" class="pginternal">135.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The Cathedral: Christchurch,
          Canterbury; but the original structure was destroyed by fire about
          1067. It was rebuilt by Lanfranc, and enlarged under his successor,
          St. Anselm. Prior Conrad finished and decorated the chancel, and
          the Church was dedicated in 1130. The choir was again burnt down in
          1174, but at once rebuilt. It was completed in 1184. A new nave and
          transept were built between 1378 and 1410, and the great central
          tower was carried up to its present height by the end of the
          fifteenth century.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_136" id="note_136" class="pginternal">136.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Afterwards called St. Augustine's
          Abbey.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_137" id="note_137" class="pginternal">137.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XXVII">27</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad init.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_138" id="note_138" class="pginternal">138.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ambleteuse, a small sea-port, about
          six miles to the north of Boulogne.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_139" id="note_139" class="pginternal">139.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">II, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_II">2</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XII">12</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_I">III, 1</a>. He was the grandson of Ida, first king of
          Bernicia (V, 24, and note). His father, Ethelric, seized Deira on
          the death of Aelli (II, 1, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg083">83</a>), and Ethelfrid ruled over both the
          Northumbrian kingdoms from 593 to 617.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_140" id="note_140" class="pginternal">140.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Gen., xlix, 27.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_141" id="note_141" class="pginternal">141.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span>, the Dalriadic Scots,
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_I">1</a>, and note. For Aedan and his wars,
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> Rhŷs, <span class="tei tei-q">“Celtic Britain,”</span> pp. 157-159.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_142" id="note_142" class="pginternal">142.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Perhaps Dalston, near Carlisle; more
          probably, on philological grounds, Dawstane Rig in Liddesdale;
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> Skene, <span class="tei tei-q">“Celtic Scotland,”</span> I, p. 162.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_143" id="note_143" class="pginternal">143.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">For a detailed study of St. Gregory,
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Gregory the Great, his place in History and
          Thought,”</span> by F. Homes Dudden, B.D. (1905). The oldest
          biographies are: (1) a Life of Gregory, written by a monk of
          Whitby, probably about 713 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>, recently discovered
          in a MS. belonging to the Monastery of St. Gallen; (2) the Life by
          Paul the Deacon, written towards the end of the eighth century; (3)
          the Life by John the Deacon, written about the end of the ninth
          century.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_144" id="note_144" class="pginternal">144.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XXIII">I, 23</a>. Gregory's pontificate extended from
          590 to 604.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_145" id="note_145" class="pginternal">145.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">1 Cor., ix, 2.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_146" id="note_146" class="pginternal">146.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">We cannot be certain which Felix is
          meant. The choice seems to lie between Felix III, Bishop of Rome,
          483-492, and Felix IV, 526-530. Mr. Homes Dudden decides in favour
          of the latter, on the authority of John the Deacon. In either case,
          the word <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">atavus</span></span> cannot be used in its
          strict sense.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_147" id="note_147" class="pginternal">147.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Apocrisiarius</span></span>, official
          representative of the see of Rome at the Imperial Court of
          Constantinople (Latin: <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="la"><span style="font-style: italic">responsalis</span></span>). Ducange explains
          the word as: <span class="tei tei-q">“nomen inditum legatis, quod
          ἀποκρίσεις seu responsa principum deferrent.”</span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_148" id="note_148" class="pginternal">148.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">His <span class="tei tei-q">“Moralia,”</span> a commentary on the Book of Job,
          expounding it historically, allegorically, and in its practical
          bearing on morals. His other undoubtedly genuine works are those
          mentioned in the text: Twenty-two homilies on Ezekiel; forty
          homilies on the Gospels for the day, preached by himself at various
          times; the <span class="tei tei-q">“Liber Regulae
          Pastoralis,”</span> on the duties and responsibilities of the
          pastoral office, a very widely studied book; four books of
          Dialogues, <span class="tei tei-q">“De vita et miraculis patrum
          Italicorum et de aeternitate animae,”</span> also one of his most
          famous works; and fourteen books of letters to various persons on
          many subjects. There are also some doubtful works. Of these, the
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Liber Sacramentorum”</span> (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.
          infra</span></span>), the <span class="tei tei-q">“Liber
          Antiphonarius”</span> (a collection of Antiphons for Mass), and the
          Hymns have been generally regarded as genuine, but recent research
          seems to show that they cannot be attributed to Gregory. That he
          introduced the <span class="tei tei-q">“Cantus Gregorianus”</span>
          can also probably be no longer maintained; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.
          infra</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XX">20</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad fin.</span></span> note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_149" id="note_149" class="pginternal">149.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Patriarch of Constantinople,
          celebrated as a saint by the Greeks. He was born at Theium in
          Phrygia, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">circ.</span></span> 512 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span> Towards the end of
          his life he maintained the above theory in a book on the
          Resurrection. He was opposed by Gregory, and the book was burnt by
          order of the Emperor Tiberius, who, however, visited him when he
          fell ill soon after, and received his blessing. He died on Easter
          Day, 582, and the <span class="tei tei-q">“heresy”</span> was
          suffered to rest. (He is, of course, not to be confused with
          Eutyches, author of the heresy known as <span class="tei tei-q">“Eutychianism,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XVII">IV, 17</a>.)</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_150" id="note_150" class="pginternal">150.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">St. Luke, xxiv, 39.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_151" id="note_151" class="pginternal">151.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Tiberius II, emperor of the East,
          578-582 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_152" id="note_152" class="pginternal">152.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">I, 27.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_153" id="note_153" class="pginternal">153.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A Synodical epistle, such as
          newly-elected bishops were in the habit of sending to other
          bishops. The subject-matter is the same as that of the <span class="tei tei-q">“Pastoral Care.”</span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_154" id="note_154" class="pginternal">154.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Heb., xii, 6.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_155" id="note_155" class="pginternal">155.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Job, xxix, 11-17.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_156" id="note_156" class="pginternal">156.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The quotation is from the Vulgate
          (Job, xxxi, 16-18). The sentence is finished in v. 22: <span class="tei tei-q">“Then let mine arm fall from my shoulder
          blade....”</span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_157" id="note_157" class="pginternal">157.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">John the Deacon attributes to Gregory
          the <span class="tei tei-q">“Liber Sacramentorum,”</span> or
          Gregorian Sacramentary, a revision of the Gelasian Sacramentary. It
          seems probable, however, that it is of much later date. Only a few
          alterations in the Liturgy and in the ceremonial of the Mass are
          proved to have been effected by Gregory. In the Canon of the Mass
          he introduced two changes, viz.: (1) he inserted the words here
          quoted; (2) he altered the position of the Lord's Prayer
          (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> Homes Dudden, pp.
          264-271).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_158" id="note_158" class="pginternal">158.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span>, 604 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>, cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XXIII">I, 23</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_I">II, 1</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          init.</span></span>, note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_159" id="note_159" class="pginternal">159.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Deira was the southern part of the
          province of Northumbria, the northern part being Bernicia. Deira
          was bounded on the south by the Humber; on the north, according to
          some authorities, by the Tyne, according to others, by the Tees.
          The discrepancy doubtless arose from the fact that the part between
          the two latter rivers was a desert subject to no authority. To the
          west lay the British kingdoms.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_160" id="note_160" class="pginternal">160.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The son of Yffi, the first king of
          Deira. The ancient pedigrees trace the descent of the royal houses
          of Deira and Bernicia from two sons of Woden.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_161" id="note_161" class="pginternal">161.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This pope was either Benedict I
          (574-578) or Pelagius II (578-590), the immediate predecessor of
          Gregory. The oldest extant life of Gregory (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span> p.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg075">75</a>, note) makes him
          Benedict, and is followed by John the Deacon. If this is right, the
          incident related in the text must be placed before Gregory's
          departure to Constantinople in 579. Paul the Deacon places it after
          his return in 585 or 586, and asserts that the pope was Pelagius
          II.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_162" id="note_162" class="pginternal">162.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The date of the synod is uncertain. It
          was probably about 602 or 603 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>, after the arrival of
          Gregory's <span class="tei tei-q">“Responsa.”</span> The
          <span class="tei tei-q">“nearest province”</span> must mean what we
          call South Wales, though it is possible that the Britons of
          Cornwall were also represented. The scene of the conference has
          been generally supposed to be Aust, on the Severn, opposite
          Chepstow, and the name may possibly preserve the memory of
          Augustine, though more probably it is derived from <span class="tei tei-q">“Trajectus Augusti”</span> (Haddan and Stubbs). Other
          possible sites are Malmesbury (Green, <span class="tei tei-q">“Making of England”</span>), and a spot called
          <span class="tei tei-q">“the Oak,”</span> near Cricklade, on the
          Upper Thames, which would be on the borders of the Hwiccas and West
          Saxons (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> Plummer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          loc.</span></span>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_163" id="note_163" class="pginternal">163.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The Hwiccas were in the present
          Gloucestershire and Worcestershire, north-west of Wessex.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_164" id="note_164" class="pginternal">164.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Cf. especially
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXV">III, 25</a>, and
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXI">V, 21</a>. (Other
            references are: II, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_IV">4</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XIX">19</a>; III, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_III">3</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_IV">4</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXVI">26</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXIX">29</a>; V, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XV">15</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXII">22</a>.)</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">A full
            discussion of this involved question is beyond our scope. Readers
            are referred to Plummer (Excursus on Paschal Controversy),
            Bright, or Hunt. Here, the point at issue may be briefly stated.
            It was regarded as essential by the Roman Church that Easter Day
            should be kept on a Sunday, in the third week of the first month,
            <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">i.e.</span></span>, the month in which the
            full moon occurred on or after the vernal equinox. The Celts
            observed the Feast on Sunday, and were, therefore, not rightly
            called <span class="tei tei-q">“Quartodecimans”</span> (the name
            given to those who observed it on the 14th of the month Nisan,
            the day of the Jewish Passover, without regard to the day of the
            week). They differed from the Romans in fixing the vernal equinox
            at March 25th, instead of March 21st, and in their reckoning of
            the third week, holding it to be from the 14th to the 20th of the
            moon inclusive. The Roman Church originally reckoned it from the
            16th to the 22nd, but ultimately fixed it from the 15th to the
            21st (cf. V, 21, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg365">365</a>).</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">There was a
            further divergence in the <span class="tei tei-q">“cycles”</span>
            adopted to ascertain the day in each year on which the Paschal
            moon would fall. The Celts retained an old cycle of eighty-four
            years, while the Romans had finally adopted one of nineteen. It
            is obvious that these differences must necessarily lead to great
            divergence in practice and consequently serious inconvenience.
            The real importance of this and the other points of difference,
            settled afterwards at the Synod of Whitby, lay in the question
            whether England was to conform to the practice of the Catholic
            Church, or to isolate herself from it by local peculiarities (cf.
            the reply of the British to Augustine: <span class="tei tei-q">“They would do none of those things nor receive him
            as their archbishop”</span>).</p>
</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_165" id="note_165" class="pginternal">165.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">E.g.</span></span>, Consecration of bishops by
          a single bishop, certain differences of ritual (Gregory's
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Responsa”</span> admit of some latitude in
          these matters), and the tonsure, which was a more controversial
          point (cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXVI">III,
          26</a>, and <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXI">V,
          21</a>). The Romans shaved only the top of the head, letting the
          hair grow in the form of a crown. The Celts shaved the whole front
          of the head from ear to ear, leaving the hair at the back. A third
          method was the Oriental, which consisted in shaving the whole head
          (cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_I">IV, 1</a>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_166" id="note_166" class="pginternal">166.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The place of the second conference is
          not mentioned. It is generally assumed that it was the same as that
          of the first. All attempts to determine the names and sees of these
          bishops rest upon the most uncertain evidence.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_167" id="note_167" class="pginternal">167.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Probably Bangor-is-Coed, in
          Flintshire, from which it appears that North Wales was represented
          at the second conference. The size and importance of the monastery
          are inferred by William of Malmesbury, writing in the twelfth
          century, from the extent of the ruins, which were all that was left
          of it in his time.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_168" id="note_168" class="pginternal">168.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Dunawd, or Dunod; Latin: Donatus
          (Rhŷs).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_169" id="note_169" class="pginternal">169.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">It is not known in what way the
          practice of the British Church differed from that of the Romans in
          the rite of Baptism. It may have been by the neglect of
          Confirmation as the completion of Baptism (cf. <span class="tei tei-q">“compleatis”</span> in the text). Other suggestions
          are: single immersion (but this was permitted in Spain); the
          omission of chrism, an omission which was affirmed of the Irish at
          a later period; some defect in the invocation of the Trinity. This
          conjecture rests on a canon respecting Baptism established in the
          English Church from the time of Augustine (quoted by Haddan and
          Stubbs from a letter of Pope Zacharias to Boniface), which enforces
          the full invocation.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_170" id="note_170" class="pginternal">170.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XXXIV">I, 34</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_171" id="note_171" class="pginternal">171.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Chester, the seat of the Twentieth
          legion. <span class="tei tei-q">“Legionum civitas, quae nunc
          simpliciter Cestra vocatur.”</span> (William of Malmesbury.) Cf.
          note on I, 7, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg018">18</a>. The
          date of the battle cannot be accurately fixed. The <span class="tei tei-q">“Annales Cambriae”</span> give 613, but it may have
          been a few years later. Bede only tells us that it was a
          considerable time after Augustine's death, which was probably in
          604 or 605.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_172" id="note_172" class="pginternal">172.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">supra</span></span>
          p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg086">86</a>, note 2.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_173" id="note_173" class="pginternal">173.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Nothing certain is known of this Welsh
          prince.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_174" id="note_174" class="pginternal">174.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XXIX">I, 29</a>, and note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_175" id="note_175" class="pginternal">175.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The site is covered by the present
          cathedral.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_176" id="note_176" class="pginternal">176.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Rochester. The new see was closely
          dependent on Canterbury, and till 1148 the archbishop had the
          appointment to this bishopric.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_177" id="note_177" class="pginternal">177.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Probably in memory of his monastery on
          the Coelian (cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XXIII">I, 23</a>). According to Rochester tradition,
          Ethelbert gave to the church some land called Priestfield to the
          south of the city, and other lands to the north. There exists a
          charter of Ethelbert to the city of Rochester, believed to be
          genuine.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_178" id="note_178" class="pginternal">178.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The year is not given, and is not
          certainly known. It is generally assumed to have been 604 or
          605.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_179" id="note_179" class="pginternal">179.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This was in 613, by Laurentius. St.
          Augustine's body was translated on September 13th. It was moved
          again in the twelfth century and placed under the high altar.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_180" id="note_180" class="pginternal">180.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-q">“Porticus”</span>; variously translated: <span class="tei tei-q">“porch,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“aisle,”</span>
<span class="tei tei-q">“transept,”</span> and <span class="tei tei-q">“chapel.”</span> Ducange explains it as <span class="tei tei-q">“aedis sacrae propylaeum in porticus formam
          exstructum,”</span> and says it was also used improperly for the
          sanctuary. Plummer (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad loc.</span></span>) says it means side
          chapel, as often. The mention of the altar just below seems to
          support this meaning (if, indeed, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">haec</span></span> refers to the <span class="tei tei-q">“porticus,”</span> and not to the church itself, as is
          assumed in the A.S. version).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_181" id="note_181" class="pginternal">181.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">For Theodore <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Preface">Preface</a>, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg002">2</a>, note 2; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_I">IV, 1</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_VIII">V, 8</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">et
          saep.</span></span>; and for Bertwald, V, 8. Cuthbert (740-758) was
          the first archbishop buried in Christ Church, Canterbury, instead
          of at St. Augustine's.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_182" id="note_182" class="pginternal">182.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XXVII">I, 27</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          init.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_183" id="note_183" class="pginternal">183.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Bede thus distinguishes them from the
          colony in Scotland. Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_I">I, 1</a>, and note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_184" id="note_184" class="pginternal">184.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ireland. Iona may be included, as may
          be inferred from a comparison of <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXI">III, 21</a> (<span class="tei tei-q">“reversus
          est ad insulam Hii”</span>) with <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXIV">III, 24</a> (<span class="tei tei-q">“ad
          Scottiam rediit”</span>). But Bede does not use <span class="tei tei-q">“Scottia”</span> for Scotland.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_185" id="note_185" class="pginternal">185.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Bishop of Inver Daeile (Ennereilly) in
          Wicklow.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_186" id="note_186" class="pginternal">186.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The most famous of the great Irish
          missionaries who laboured on the Continent. He was born in Leinster
          about 540, went to Gaul about 574, founded three monasteries
          (Annegray, Luxeuil, and Fontaines), worked for twenty years among
          the Franks and Burgundians, afterwards among the Suevi and
          Alemanni, and finally in Italy, where he founded a monastery at
          Bobbio and died there in 615. He was a vigorous supporter of the
          Celtic usages and an active opponent of Arianism. He instituted a
          monastic rule of great severity.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_187" id="note_187" class="pginternal">187.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Nothing more is known of this council.
          The pope was Boniface IV, 608-615.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_188" id="note_188" class="pginternal">188.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">610 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_189" id="note_189" class="pginternal">189.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">To commemorate the dedication the pope
          introduced into the Western Church the Festival of All Saints,
          celebrated at first probably on 13th May. The Eastern Church had
          from early times observed a Festival of All Martyrs, which became
          later the Festival of All Saints, kept by them on the Sunday after
          Whitsunday.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_190" id="note_190" class="pginternal">190.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">As Bretwalda, or paramount sovereign
          (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> Stubbs, <span class="tei tei-q">“Constitutional History,”</span> I, pp. 162-163). Aelli
          and Ceaulin are not elsewhere mentioned in this work. For Redwald,
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.
          infra</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XII">12</a>; for Edwin, c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_IX">9</a>, foll.; for Oswald, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_I">III, 1</a>, foll.; and for
          Oswy, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XIV">III, 14</a>,
          foll.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_191" id="note_191" class="pginternal">191.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Anglesea and Man.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_192" id="note_192" class="pginternal">192.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This is inaccurate and inconsistent
          with Bede's own statement in <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIV">V. 24</a>. Augustine did not arrive in Britain till
          597. The dates given above, at the beginning of this chapter, are,
          however, probably correct, if he means that Ethelbert died
          twenty-one years after the dispatch of the mission from Rome.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_193" id="note_193" class="pginternal">193.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The Witenagemot, the supreme assembly.
          This is the first recorded instance of its legislative action. The
          <span class="tei tei-q">“decisions”</span> are the so-called
          <span class="tei tei-q">“dooms.”</span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_194" id="note_194" class="pginternal">194.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-q">“—ing”</span>
          is a Saxon patronymic.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_195" id="note_195" class="pginternal">195.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">It was Ethelbert's second wife. Bertha
          had died before him.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_196" id="note_196" class="pginternal">196.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Or Gewissae. The West Saxons, an
          antiquated term for them. Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_VII">III, 7</a>: <span class="tei tei-q">“Occidentalium
          Saxonum, qui antiquitus Gewissae vocabantur”</span> (cf.
          <span class="tei tei-q">“visi”</span> = west, in <span class="tei tei-q">“Visigoth”</span>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_197" id="note_197" class="pginternal">197.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">At Canterbury, to the east of the
          church of SS. Peter and Paul, to which it was afterwards
          joined.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_198" id="note_198" class="pginternal">198.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">619 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_199" id="note_199" class="pginternal">199.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Boniface V.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_200" id="note_200" class="pginternal">200.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Their names are said to have been:
          Severus, Severianus, Victorinus, and Carpophorus (v. addition to
          Bede's Martyrology at 8th November). They suffered martyrdom at
          Rome in the Diocletian persecution. A church was erected in their
          honour on the Coelian, and on its site stands the present church of
          the Santi Quattro Coronati.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_201" id="note_201" class="pginternal">201.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">St. Matt., xxviii, 20.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_202" id="note_202" class="pginternal">202.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span>, the reward is bestowed on
          that gift of faithful and successful service which he might hand on
          in its results to posterity. But the text is probably corrupt, and
          it is difficult to extract sense from it.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_203" id="note_203" class="pginternal">203.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">St. Matt., x, 22.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_204" id="note_204" class="pginternal">204.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">He means Eadbald.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_205" id="note_205" class="pginternal">205.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ps. xix, 4.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_206" id="note_206" class="pginternal">206.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. 5, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg094">94</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_207" id="note_207" class="pginternal">207.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XXIX">I, 29</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_208" id="note_208" class="pginternal">208.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Except Kent. Cf. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">supra</span></span>,
          c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_V">5</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_209" id="note_209" class="pginternal">209.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ibid.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_210" id="note_210" class="pginternal">210.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A term of endearment.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_211" id="note_211" class="pginternal">211.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">2 Cor., xi, 2.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_212" id="note_212" class="pginternal">212.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">2 Cor., iv, 4.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_213" id="note_213" class="pginternal">213.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Apparently joint king with his father,
          Cynegils (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_VII">III,
          7</a>). The hegemony which the West-Saxon Ceaulin had possessed
          (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_V">5</a>) had passed to
          Northumbria.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_214" id="note_214" class="pginternal">214.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span>, Easter Eve, April 19th,
          626.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_215" id="note_215" class="pginternal">215.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Supposed to be at Aldby, near Stamford
          Bridge, but other conjectures have been advanced.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_216" id="note_216" class="pginternal">216.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Twelve in some MSS. and in <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIV">V, 24</a>. The baptism was
          on the Eve of Whitsunday (cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIV">V. 24</a>, <span class="tei tei-q">“in Sabbato
          Pentecostes”</span>). The Eves of Easter and Whitsunday were usual
          days for baptisms; the Roman Church tried to limit them to these
          seasons, but Christmas and Epiphany were also favourite times.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_217" id="note_217" class="pginternal">217.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Boniface V, unless, as Dr. Bright
          suggests, the name is a scribe's error for Honorius, his successor.
          Boniface V died in October, 625. Paulinus had only been consecrated
          in the preceding July, so it is impossible that Boniface could have
          heard of Edwin's delay in receiving the faith; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
          following letter (c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XI">11</a>). But there is a reference in the same letter
          to Eadbald's conversion, the news of which must have come in the
          time of Boniface rather than of Honorius. The difficulty is not
          cleared up.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_218" id="note_218" class="pginternal">218.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Reading <span class="tei tei-q">“profert”</span> for the impossible <span class="tei tei-q">“proferetur.”</span> The style of this letter is very
          involved and there seems to be a good deal of corruption in the
          text.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_219" id="note_219" class="pginternal">219.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Adopting the conjecture <span class="tei tei-q">“propinemus.”</span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_220" id="note_220" class="pginternal">220.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The MSS. reading (<span class="tei tei-q">“totius creaturae suae dilatandi subdi”</span>) yields
          no sense here, but no satisfactory conjecture has been made.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_221" id="note_221" class="pginternal">221.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">From the Vulgate, Ps. xcv, 5 (Ps.
          xcvi, 5 in our Psalter).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_222" id="note_222" class="pginternal">222.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ps. cxiii, 5-8 (cxv in our
          Psalter).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_223" id="note_223" class="pginternal">223.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Gen., ii, 24; St. Matt., xix, 5; St.
          Mark, x, 7; Eph., v, 31.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_224" id="note_224" class="pginternal">224.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">1 Cor., vii, 14, cf. 16.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_225" id="note_225" class="pginternal">225.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Reading <span class="tei tei-q">“conversione.”</span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_226" id="note_226" class="pginternal">226.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span>, of East Anglia (Norfolk,
          Suffolk, and Cambridgeshire). Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_V">5</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad init.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_227" id="note_227" class="pginternal">227.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XXXIV">I, 34</a>, and note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_228" id="note_228" class="pginternal">228.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. Verg. Aen., IV, 2, <span class="tei tei-q">“caeco carpitur igni.”</span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_229" id="note_229" class="pginternal">229.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A tributary of the Trent. The battle
          is supposed to have been fought near Retford, in Nottinghamshire,
          before April 12th, 617. Cf. Bede's statement that Edwin was
          baptized on April 12th, 627, in the eleventh year of his reign (c.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XIV">14</a>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_230" id="note_230" class="pginternal">230.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The Witenagemot.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_231" id="note_231" class="pginternal">231.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Goodmanham, near Market Weighton, in
          the East Riding of Yorkshire.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_232" id="note_232" class="pginternal">232.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. Verg. Aen., II. 502.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_233" id="note_233" class="pginternal">233.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span>, Easter Eve. Cf. c. 9, p.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg104">104</a>, note 3.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_234" id="note_234" class="pginternal">234.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">On the site now covered by York
          Cathedral. The little wooden oratory was carefully preserved and
          adorned with gifts. The church has been repeatedly rebuilt, and of
          the Saxon building nothing remains but the central wall of the
          crypt.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_235" id="note_235" class="pginternal">235.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">infra</span></span>
          c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XX">20</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_236" id="note_236" class="pginternal">236.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The newly-baptized wore white garments
          till the octave of the day of their baptism, and appeared in church
          daily with lighted tapers and accompanied by their sponsors.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_237" id="note_237" class="pginternal">237.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">For Wuscfrea and Yffi, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.
          infra</span></span> c. 20, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg132">132</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_238" id="note_238" class="pginternal">238.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Yeavering in Glendale, near Wooler in
          Northumberland. The name, Adgefrin, is one of those (common in
          Anglo-Saxon) in which the preposition is prefixed. <span class="tei tei-q">“Æt”</span> (Latin <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="la"><span style="font-style: italic">ad</span></span>) and <span class="tei tei-q">“in”</span> are so used. The idiom is preserved in the
          Latin. Cf. Ad Murum, Ad Caprae Caput (III, 21), Infeppingum
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">(ibid.),
          et saep.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_239" id="note_239" class="pginternal">239.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The stream, in its upper reaches
          called the Bowmont Water, is still called the Glen at Yeavering. It
          is a tributary of the Till. Pallinsburn, in the neighbourhood of
          Coldstream, preserves by its name the memory of similar baptisms by
          Paulinus.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_240" id="note_240" class="pginternal">240.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Perhaps Millfield, near Wooler; but
          Mindrum and Kirknewton in the same district have also been
          suggested.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_241" id="note_241" class="pginternal">241.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Catterick Bridge (the Roman station
          Cataractonium, on the Watling Street), near Richmond in the North
          Riding of Yorkshire.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_242" id="note_242" class="pginternal">242.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Perhaps Doncaster. Other suggestions
          are Slack, near Huddersfield, and Tanfield, near Ripon. The
          Anglo-Saxon version has Donafeld.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_243" id="note_243" class="pginternal">243.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Leeds. The royal township
          (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">villa</span></span>) is said to have been at
          Oswinthorp.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_244" id="note_244" class="pginternal">244.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Elmet Wood, near Leeds.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_245" id="note_245" class="pginternal">245.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. IV, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XVII">17</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXIII">23</a>. His father was Ethelhere, King of East Anglia
          (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXIV">III,
          24</a>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_246" id="note_246" class="pginternal">246.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">For the patronymic, cf. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">supra</span></span>
          c. 5, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg095">95</a>, and
          note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_247" id="note_247" class="pginternal">247.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XVIII">III, 18</a>. He was Earpwald's half-brother,
          and had been driven into exile by his step-father, Redwald. Besides
          becoming a Christian, he had acquired a taste for secular learning
          in the ecclesiastical schools of Gaul.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_248" id="note_248" class="pginternal">248.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. III, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XVIII">18</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XX">20</a>. <span class="tei tei-q">“An important feature of this mission, as it was of the
          Kentish, was the combination of education with religion, by means
          of a school such as Sigbert had seen abroad, and as by this time
          existed at Canterbury in connection with the house of SS. Peter and
          Paul”</span> (Bright, p. 143). The name of Felix is preserved in
          Felixstowe, on the coast of Suffolk, and in Feliskirk, a Yorkshire
          village.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_249" id="note_249" class="pginternal">249.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Infra</span></span> cc. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XVI">16</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XVIII">18</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">et
          saep.</span></span> He was a disciple of Pope Gregory, <span class="tei tei-q">“vir in rebus ecclesiasticis sublimiter
          institutus”</span> (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XIX">V, 19</a>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_250" id="note_250" class="pginternal">250.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Dunwich, on the coast of Suffolk, once
          an important town, afterwards partially submerged. The diocese was
          divided into two by Theodore, and both sees became extinct during
          the Danish invasions. After various vicissitudes, the seat of the
          East Anglian bishopric was established at Norwich. Cf. IV, 5, p.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg231">231</a>, note 1.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_251" id="note_251" class="pginternal">251.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Lindsey, the largest of the three
          divisions of Lincolnshire, was at times Mercian, at times
          Northumbrian. At this time it appears to have been dependent on
          Northumbria; cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XII">IV, 12</a>, note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_252" id="note_252" class="pginternal">252.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">infra</span></span>
          c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XVIII">18</a>,
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          init.</span></span> The church which stands on the probable site of
          this church is called St. Paul's. The name has been supposed to be
          a corruption of <span class="tei tei-q">“Paulinus.”</span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_253" id="note_253" class="pginternal">253.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Partney, in Lincolnshire; afterwards
          it became a cell of Bardney Abbey.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_254" id="note_254" class="pginternal">254.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The place cannot be identified with
          certainty. Torksey, Southwell, Newark, Fiskerton, and Littleborough
          have all been suggested.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_255" id="note_255" class="pginternal">255.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">infra</span></span>
          c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XX">20</a>,
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          fin.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_256" id="note_256" class="pginternal">256.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A form of standard adopted from the
          Romans. It was made of feathers attached to a spear.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_257" id="note_257" class="pginternal">257.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. the instructions of Gregory:
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XXIX">I, 29</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_258" id="note_258" class="pginternal">258.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Bede does not mention the year of his
          death. The Saxon Chronicle places it in 627, and this is supported
          by William of Malmesbury. Smith places it in 630.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_259" id="note_259" class="pginternal">259.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">St. Matt., xi, 28.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_260" id="note_260" class="pginternal">260.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">St. Matt., xxv, 21.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_261" id="note_261" class="pginternal">261.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span>, the kings of Northumbria
          and Kent. For similar combined action on the part of a Northumbrian
          and a Kentish king, cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXIX">III, 29</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_262" id="note_262" class="pginternal">262.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span>, Heracleonas, son of
          Heraclius and half-brother of Constantine III; associated with them
          in the Empire.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_263" id="note_263" class="pginternal">263.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span>, Irish. For their error
          with regard to Easter, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_IV">4</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_264" id="note_264" class="pginternal">264.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">John IV, consecrated December 25th,
          640. Severinus was Pope for a few months only. Apparently (cf.
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">infra</span></span>) the Irish ecclesiastics
          had consulted him about the Easter question.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_265" id="note_265" class="pginternal">265.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">supra</span></span>
          c. 2, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg084">84</a>, note. On the
          Paschal question the Council of Nicaea passed no canon, but the
          understanding was established that <span class="tei tei-q">“all the
          brethren in the East, who formerly celebrated Easter with the Jews,
          will henceforth keep it agreeably with the Romans and ourselves and
          all who from ancient time have kept Easter as we”</span>;
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">i.e.</span></span>, that they should all keep
          Easter on the first day of the week, but never on the 14th of the
          month Nisan, even when it fell on a Sunday. The object of the rule
          was to avoid the day of the Jewish Passover.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_266" id="note_266" class="pginternal">266.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_X">I, 10</a>, note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_267" id="note_267" class="pginternal">267.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">These bishops have been identified as
          follows: Tomianus is Tomene, Abbot and Bishop of Armagh; Columbanus
          is Colman, Abbot of Clonard (also a bishop); Cromanus is Cronan,
          Bishop of Nendrum, or Inishmahee; Dinnaus is probably Dima, Bishop
          of Connor; Baithanus has not been identified with any certainty.
          With regard to the priests the proposed identifications are more
          conjectural. Saranus is a certain Saran Ua Critain. Two
          vice-gerents of the Papal see are associated with the Pope elect in
          writing this letter. The arch-presbyter and the <span class="tei tei-q">“primicerius notariorum,”</span> with the archdeacon,
          acted as vice-gerents during a vacancy, or in the absence of the
          Pope (cf. Plummer <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad loc.</span></span>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_268" id="note_268" class="pginternal">268.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This is not fairly stated. The Irish
          were not <span class="tei tei-q">“Quartodecimans,”</span>
<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">i.e.</span></span>, did not insist on the
          celebration of Easter being on the fourteenth of the moon. They
          only included that day as a possible one for Easter (cf.
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">supra</span></span> c. 2, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg084">84</a>, note 3).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_269" id="note_269" class="pginternal">269.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ps. li, 5, in our Psalter. The
          quotation is partly from the Vulgate, partly from the <span class="tei tei-q">“Roman”</span> Psalter, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">i.e.</span></span>,
          Jerome's revision of the old Italic version.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_270" id="note_270" class="pginternal">270.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Or Cadwallon, King of Gwynedd, in
          North Wales. His father Cadvan, had sheltered Edwin during his
          exile. Afterwards, when Cadwallon invaded Northumbria, Edwin
          defeated him and drove him from his kingdom. Having regained it,
          Cadwallon now allied himself with Penda, king of the Mercians (626-
          or 627-655) in a successful attempt to shake off the Northumbrian
          supremacy.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_271" id="note_271" class="pginternal">271.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Generally identified with Hatfield
          Chase, north-east of Doncaster.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_272" id="note_272" class="pginternal">272.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">C. 14, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg119">119</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_273" id="note_273" class="pginternal">273.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ibid.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_274" id="note_274" class="pginternal">274.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">His body was ultimately buried at
          Whitby; cf. III, 24, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg190">190</a>, and note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_275" id="note_275" class="pginternal">275.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">For Eanfled, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span> c.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_IX">9</a>. For Yffi and
          Wuscfrea, c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XIV">14</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_276" id="note_276" class="pginternal">276.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_V">5</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_277" id="note_277" class="pginternal">277.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">He was a kinsman. Ethelberg's mother,
          Bertha, was a daughter of Charibert, King of Paris (cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XXV">I, 25</a>, note). His
          brother, Chilperic, was Dagobert's grandfather.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_278" id="note_278" class="pginternal">278.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_VIII">8</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_279" id="note_279" class="pginternal">279.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">C. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XVI">16</a>, and <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXV">III, 25</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_280" id="note_280" class="pginternal">280.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XIV">14</a>. The village cannot be identified.
          Akeburgh has been suggested, the name being regarded as a
          corruption of <span class="tei tei-q">“Jacobsburgh.”</span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_281" id="note_281" class="pginternal">281.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The <span class="tei tei-q">“Cantus
          Romanus,”</span> brought to England by the Roman mission;
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">i.e.</span></span>, the style of Church music
          according to the use of Rome. The theory that Gregory the Great was
          the founder of Gregorian music, which superseded the old
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Cantus Ambrosianus”</span> everywhere in
          the West except at Milan, must in all probability be abandoned. It
          seems to be established that no change of any importance was made
          till nearly a hundred years after Gregory's time, and <span class="tei tei-q">“the terms <span class="tei tei-q">‘Gregorianus,’</span> <span class="tei tei-q">‘Ambrosianus Cantus,’</span> probably mean nothing more
          than the style of singing according to the respective uses of Rome
          and Milan.”</span> (F. Homes Dudden, <span class="tei tei-q">“Gregory the Great,”</span> I, p. 274.)</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_282" id="note_282" class="pginternal">282.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. II, 1, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg082">82</a>, note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_283" id="note_283" class="pginternal">283.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XXXIV">I, 34</a>; II, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_II">2</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XII">12</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_284" id="note_284" class="pginternal">284.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span>, Osric and Eanfrid.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_285" id="note_285" class="pginternal">285.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XX">II, 20</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad init.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_286" id="note_286" class="pginternal">286.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-q">“In oppido
          municipio.”</span> Commentators are agreed that Bede means York. It
          was a Roman <span class="tei tei-q">“Colonia,”</span> and is called
          a <span class="tei tei-q">“municipium”</span> by Aurelius Victor,
          though whether Bede attaches any definitely Roman meaning to the
          term seems doubtful. Ducange explains <span class="tei tei-q">“municipium”</span> as <span class="tei tei-q">“castrum,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“castellum
          muris cinctum.”</span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_287" id="note_287" class="pginternal">287.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">From the death of Edwin (October 12th,
          633), for Oswald's reign is reckoned as lasting nine years,
          including the <span class="tei tei-q">“hateful year,”</span> and he
          was killed August 5th, 642. Cf. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">infra</span></span>
          c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_IX">9</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_288" id="note_288" class="pginternal">288.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span>, probably before the end of
          634.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_289" id="note_289" class="pginternal">289.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Not identified with any certainty, but
          probably the Rowley Water or a tributary of it. It cannot be, as
          has been suggested, the Devil's Water, which is clearly
          distinguished from it in a charter of the thirteenth century.
          Caedwalla must have fled southwards for eight or nine miles after
          the battle (cf. next note).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_290" id="note_290" class="pginternal">290.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">For another instance of a name with an
          inner meaning, cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XV">II, 15</a>. The site of the battle is probably seven
          or eight miles north of Hexham (v. next note), Oswald having taken
          up his position on the northern side of the Roman wall between the
          Tyne and the Solway (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">i.e.</span></span>, the wall attributed to
          Hadrian, cf. I, 12, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg025">25</a>,
          note). According to tradition the battle was finally won at a place
          called Halydene (Hallington?), two miles to the east.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_291" id="note_291" class="pginternal">291.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Hexham. Wilfrid built a magnificent
          church there between the years 672-678 on land given by
          Ethelthryth, wife of Egfrid, king of Northumbria. It became the see
          of a bishop in 678 when the great northern diocese was subdivided
          by Theodore (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XII">IV, 12</a>). Bede's own monastery of Wearmouth
          and Jarrow was in the diocese of Hexham. The bishopric became
          extinct in 821.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_292" id="note_292" class="pginternal">292.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The place is still called St.
          Oswald's, and a little chapel probably marks the spot.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_293" id="note_293" class="pginternal">293.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span>, Irish.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_294" id="note_294" class="pginternal">294.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_II">II, 2</a>, note on Paschal Controversy.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_295" id="note_295" class="pginternal">295.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Bishop of Laodicea, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">circ.</span></span>
          284 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span> According to
          Eusebius, he was the first to arrange the cycle of nineteen years.
          The Canon quoted by the Celts in support of their observance of
          Easter is proved to be a forgery, probably of the seventh century
          and of British origin.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_296" id="note_296" class="pginternal">296.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Probably they adopted Catholic customs
          about 633, after the return of their delegates sent to consult the
          Roman Church on this question in 631.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_297" id="note_297" class="pginternal">297.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. Preface, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg004">4</a>, note 3. The Celtic missionaries were
          generally attracted to remote sites, and this, the first mission
          station of the Celtic Church in Northumbria, was doubtless chosen
          for the resemblance of its physical features to Iona. The
          constitution was also modelled on that of Iona, with this
          difference, that it was an episcopal see as well as a monastery. It
          was included in the <span class="tei tei-q">“province”</span> of
          the Abbot of Iona. The Bishop and all the clergy were monks, and
          Aidan himself was Abbot as well as Bishop.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_298" id="note_298" class="pginternal">298.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-q">“Sacerdotali,”</span> perhaps (but not necessarily
          here) = <span class="tei tei-q">“episcopal,”</span> as often. There
          may have been a number of the Irish non-diocesan bishops in the
          mission.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_299" id="note_299" class="pginternal">299.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Iona, a name supposed to have arisen
          from a mistaken reading of <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Ioua</span></span>, an adjectival form used by
          Adamnan (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v. infra</span></span> note 4), feminine,
          agreeing with <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">insula</span></span>, formed from the Irish
          name, I, Ii, Hii, etc. (the forms vary greatly). Then <span class="tei tei-q">“Iona”</span> was fancifully regarded as the Hebrew
          equivalent for <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Columba</span></span> (= a dove), and this
          helped to preserve the name.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_300" id="note_300" class="pginternal">300.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span>, Irish.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_301" id="note_301" class="pginternal">301.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">For St. Columba, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> Dr.
          Reeves's edition of the life by Adamnan, Abbot of Iona, 679-704
          (cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XV">V, 15</a>,
          note). Authorities are divided with regard to the date of his
          coming to Britain. Dr. Reeves and Mr. Skene, following the Annals
          of Tighernach, decide in favour of 563. For his name, <span class="tei tei-q">“Columcille,”</span> cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_IX">V, 9</a>, note. He was of Irish birth,
          connected with the Dalriadic Scots, and of royal descent on both
          sides of his house. He was ordained priest at Clonard, but was
          never a bishop. Many ecclesiastical and monastic foundations
          throughout Ireland and Scotland are attributed to him. He travelled
          much in both countries, visited Bruide (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.
          infra</span></span>) at Inverness, and founded churches all over
          the north of Scotland. He also worked indefatigably in his own
          monastery of Iona. In his earlier years his excitable, impatient
          temperament seems to have involved him in various wars. He is said
          to have stirred up his kinsmen against the Irish king, Diarmaid;
          and it has been supposed that his mission to the Picts was
          undertaken in expiation of the bloodshed for which he was
          responsible.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_302" id="note_302" class="pginternal">302.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">There is much that is legendary in the
          account of St. Ninias, and Bede only professes to give the
          tradition. He was a Briton, probably a native of Strathclyde. He
          studied at Rome and received episcopal consecration there; came
          under the influence of St. Martin of Tours, to whom he afterwards
          dedicated his church in Galloway, and returned as a missionary to
          Britain. His preaching led to the conversion of the Picts of
          Galloway and those to whom Bede alludes here as situated to the
          south of the Grampians. Irish tradition, difficult to reconcile
          with Bede's statement that he was buried at Whitern, tells that he
          spent the last years of his life in Ireland and founded a church at
          Leinster. He was commemorated there on September 16th, under the
          name of Moinenn. The traditional date of his death, September 16th,
          432, has no authority.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_303" id="note_303" class="pginternal">303.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Whitern, on Wigton Bay, so called from
          the white appearance of the stone church, as compared with the
          usual wooden buildings. The dedication must have been subsequent to
          St. Martin's death, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">circ.</span></span> 397. The see was revived
          as an Anglian one in Bede's own time (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> V.
          23, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg381">381</a>). For the form
          of the name, <span class="tei tei-q">“Ad Candidam Casam,”</span>
          cf. II, 14, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg119">119</a>, note
          5.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_304" id="note_304" class="pginternal">304.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Bruide Mac Maelchon had defeated the
          Dalriadic Scots in 560 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span> and driven them back
          to Cantyre. Northwards his dominion extended as far as the Orkneys
          and it is probable that it included the eastern lowlands north of
          the Forth (cf. Rhŷs, <span class="tei tei-q">“Celtic
          Britain”</span>). Another tradition (Irish) represents Conall, King
          of the Dalriadic Scots, as the donor of Iona, but the earliest
          Irish authority (ninth or tenth century) agrees with Bede.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_305" id="note_305" class="pginternal">305.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The year in which he died, as well as
          the ultimate resting-place of his relics, is uncertain. Dr. Reeves
          places his death in 597, the year of St. Augustine's landing.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_306" id="note_306" class="pginternal">306.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span>, in Irish. The place is
          Durrow in Leinster.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_307" id="note_307" class="pginternal">307.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">There was no diocesan episcopate in
          the early Irish Church; it was organized on a monastic system.
          Bishops performed all episcopal functions (ordination, etc.), but
          they lived in the monastery, subject to the supreme authority of
          the abbot, who was aided in the government by a council of senior
          monks. Bishops were also sent out as missionaries. The functions of
          abbot and bishop might be combined in one man, but the abbot, as
          such, could discharge no episcopal duties. A great monastery was
          head of a <span class="tei tei-q">“provincia”</span> (<span class="tei tei-q">“diocesis,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“parochia”</span>), and had many monasteries and
          churches dependent on it.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_308" id="note_308" class="pginternal">308.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXVII">27</a>, IV, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_III">3</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXVI">26</a>; V, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_IX">9</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_X">10</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXII">22</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIII">23</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIV">24</a>. Perhaps <span class="tei tei-q">“sacerdos”</span> should be translated <span class="tei tei-q">“bishop”</span> here (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.
          supra</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_III">3</a>, note; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">infra</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXVII">27</a>, note). Early
          writers allude to him as a bishop, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">e.g.</span></span>,
          Alcuin, Ethelwulf. In the life of St. Adalbert, one of Wilbrord's
          companions (cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_X">V.
          10</a>), he is called <span class="tei tei-q">“Northumbrorum
          episcopus.”</span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_309" id="note_309" class="pginternal">309.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span>, they were not <span class="tei tei-q">“Quartodecimans”</span> (cf. II, 2, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg084">84</a>, note 3).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_310" id="note_310" class="pginternal">310.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Phil., iii, 15.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_311" id="note_311" class="pginternal">311.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XIX">II, 19</a>. He is probably to be identified with the
          Segenus mentioned there as one of the priests to whom Pope John's
          letter was addressed. He was Abbot of Iona, 623-652.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_312" id="note_312" class="pginternal">312.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Hector Boethius gives his name as
          Corman.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_313" id="note_313" class="pginternal">313.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. I, 1, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg006">6</a>, note 2.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_314" id="note_314" class="pginternal">314.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Bamborough (Bebbanburh, Bebburgh,
          Babbanburch, etc. There are many forms of the name). It is
          uncertain who the queen was. Nennius says she was the wife of
          Ethelfrid. His wife, Oswald's mother, was Acha (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.
          infra</span></span>), but he may have been married twice. It was
          Ida, the first king of Bernicia, who founded Bamborough (Sax.
          Chron.).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_315" id="note_315" class="pginternal">315.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_V">II, 5</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad fin.</span></span>, note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_316" id="note_316" class="pginternal">316.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. note on Cuichelm, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_IX">II, 9</a>. Cynegils began to
          reign in 611 and reigned about thirty-one years.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_317" id="note_317" class="pginternal">317.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This account tells us substantially
          all that is known of him. Additional details are either legendary
          or conjectural. He was made a missionary (<span class="tei tei-q">“regionary”</span>) bishop, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">i.e.</span></span>,
          had no fixed see assigned to him.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_318" id="note_318" class="pginternal">318.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">II, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XVII">17</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XVIII">18</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XIX">19</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XX">20</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_319" id="note_319" class="pginternal">319.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">He was Archbishop of Milan, residing
          at Genoa. <span class="tei tei-q">“Asterius ... like his
          predecessors from 568, avoided contact with the dominant Arian
          Lombards by residing within the imperial territory at Genoa”</span>
          (Bright).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_320" id="note_320" class="pginternal">320.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Called Cyneburga by Reginald of Durham
          (Life of St. Oswald).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_321" id="note_321" class="pginternal">321.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Dorchester, about nine miles from
          Oxford, near the junction of the Thame and the Thames. The Abbey
          Church of SS. Peter and Paul stands on the traditional site of
          Cynegil's baptism. The see became extinct on the retirement of
          Agilbert (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v. infra</span></span>), but there are some
          grounds for believing that it was revived for a short time as a
          Mercian see in 679 (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg272">272</a>, note), after which it again disappeared
          till, in the ninth century, the Bishop of Leicester moved his see
          to Dorchester.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_322" id="note_322" class="pginternal">322.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XII">IV, 12</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XVIII">V, 18</a>. Haedde became bishop in 676 (Sax. Chron.).
          His see was at Winchester. He removed the bones of Birinus, because
          Dorchester had ceased to be an episcopal see. Winchester continued
          to be the only West Saxon see till the diocese was again divided
          (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XVIII">V, 18</a>), when Daniel was established at
          Winchester, and Aldhelm at Sherborne.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_323" id="note_323" class="pginternal">323.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Winchester; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Gwent</span></span>
          (Celtic) = a plain. This, the <span class="tei tei-q">“old
          Church,”</span> as distinguished from the present Cathedral, was
          built by Coinwalch on his restoration to his kingdom. There are
          legends of early British churches on the site, the first founded by
          <span class="tei tei-q">“King Lucius”</span> (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_IV">I, 4</a>), the second
          dedicated to <span class="tei tei-q">“St. Amphibalus”</span> (I, 7,
          p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg015">15</a>, note).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_324" id="note_324" class="pginternal">324.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cuichelm (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_IX">II, 9</a>, and note)
          had died before his father, Cynegils.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_325" id="note_325" class="pginternal">325.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Bede reverts more than once to the
          subject of Anna's pious offspring, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.
          infra</span></span> cc. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_VIII">8</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XVIII">18</a>; IV, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XIX">19</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XX">20</a>. He had four daughters: Sexburg (c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_VIII">8</a>, IV, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XIX">19</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXII">22</a>), Ethelberg (c.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_VIII">8</a>),
          Ethelthryth (IV, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XIX">19</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XX">20</a>; cf. IV, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_III">3</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXII">22</a>), and Witberg (not mentioned by Bede); two
          granddaughters, Earcongota (c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_VIII">8</a>) and Ermingild, the wife of Wulfhere of Mercia;
          all of whom entered convents, as did also his step-daughter,
          Saethryth (c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_VIII">8</a>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_326" id="note_326" class="pginternal">326.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cc. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXV">25</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXVI">26</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXVIII">28</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_I">IV, 1</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XIX">V, 19</a>. The name is a Frankish form of the English
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Aethelbert.”</span> He was apparently
          consecrated in Gaul, but not appointed to any diocese.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_327" id="note_327" class="pginternal">327.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXVIII">28</a>. It is not known why he was expelled
          (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.
          infra</span></span>). There is a tradition that he spent the last
          three years of his life at Winchester as a penitent, doubtless for
          the act of simony related below, but this is inconsistent with
          Bede's statement that he remained Bishop of London till his
          death.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_328" id="note_328" class="pginternal">328.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Winchester; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span>
          pp. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg148">148-9</a>, notes.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_329" id="note_329" class="pginternal">329.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">London was an East Saxon bishopric,
          but Wulfhere (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXIV">24</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          fin.</span></span>) had acquired the supremacy over the East Saxons
          (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXX">30</a>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_330" id="note_330" class="pginternal">330.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Hlothere, consecrated 670. Apparently
          he was appointed by a West Saxon Synod (<span class="tei tei-q">“ex
          synodica sanctione”</span>). Dr. Bright thinks the term is used
          loosely for a Witenagemot.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_331" id="note_331" class="pginternal">331.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">II, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_V">5-9</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XX">20</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIV">V, 24</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_332" id="note_332" class="pginternal">332.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Faremoûtier-en-Brie (Farae Monasterium
          in Brige), founded <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">circ.</span></span> 617 by Fara, or
          Burgundofara, a Burgundian lady of noble birth, said to have been
          dedicated by St. Columba in her infancy. The monastery was a double
          one, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">i.e.</span></span>, consisted of monks and
          nuns (cf. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">infra</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“many of the brethren”</span>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_333" id="note_333" class="pginternal">333.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Chelles, near Paris, founded by
          Clothilde, wife of Clovis I, restored and enlarged by Bathild, wife
          of Clovis II (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XIX">V, 19</a>, note).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_334" id="note_334" class="pginternal">334.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Andeley-sur-Seine, also founded by
          Clothilde, wife of Clovis I.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_335" id="note_335" class="pginternal">335.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">supra</span></span>
          c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_VII">7</a>, note on
          Anna.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_336" id="note_336" class="pginternal">336.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ibid.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_337" id="note_337" class="pginternal">337.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ibid.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_338" id="note_338" class="pginternal">338.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ibid.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_339" id="note_339" class="pginternal">339.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_I">1</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_340" id="note_340" class="pginternal">340.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The place is commonly supposed to be
          near Oswestry in Shropshire (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">i.e.</span></span>, Oswald's Tree). There is a
          legend (related by Reginald) which tells of a tree near the spot,
          to which a large bird carried the king's right arm from the stake
          (cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XII">12</a>
<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          fin.</span></span>). The Welsh name of the place, <span class="tei tei-q">“Croes Oswallt”</span> (Cross-Oswald), points to the
          explanation that the <span class="tei tei-q">“tree”</span> was a
          wooden cross set up to mark the site.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_341" id="note_341" class="pginternal">341.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">642, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">i.e.</span></span>,
          nine years after the death of Edwin.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_342" id="note_342" class="pginternal">342.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Reading <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">stramine
          subtracto</span></span>, on the authority of the oldest MSS., in
          which case we must assume (with Plummer) that <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">stramen</span></span> is used incorrectly for
          <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">stragulus</span></span> in the sense of
          <span class="tei tei-q">“saddle,”</span> or <span class="tei tei-q">“horse-cloth,”</span> from the classical use,
          <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">sternere equum</span></span> = to saddle. Cf.
          <span class="tei tei-q">“stratus regaliter,”</span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XIV">14</a>. Later MSS. read
          <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">stramine substrato</span></span> (=
          <span class="tei tei-q">“spreading straw under him”</span>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_343" id="note_343" class="pginternal">343.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Wife of Ethelred of Mercia (cf.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXI">IV, 21</a>),
          murdered by her own people in 697 (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIV">V, 24</a>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_344" id="note_344" class="pginternal">344.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Bardney, in Lincolnshire. Ethelred
          became first a monk, afterwards abbot of the monastery.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_345" id="note_345" class="pginternal">345.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-q">“Sacrarium.”</span> Probably here = the cemetery. But
          we find it elsewhere in Bede for the sacristy, and it is also used
          of the sanctuary.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_346" id="note_346" class="pginternal">346.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXVII">27</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XII">IV, 12</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_347" id="note_347" class="pginternal">347.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Partney: cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XVI">II, 16</a>, and note. This
          is the only mention of its abbot, Aldwin.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_348" id="note_348" class="pginternal">348.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Aen. II, 1. Quotations from Vergil are
          frequent in Bede. Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XIII">II, 13</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad fin.</span></span>; v. 12, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg327">327</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_349" id="note_349" class="pginternal">349.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span>, matins (between midnight
          and 3 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.m.</span></span>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_350" id="note_350" class="pginternal">350.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">It was removed in 875, during the
          Danish invasions, in the coffin of St. Cuthbert, and finally
          interred in the same tomb with the body of Cuthbert at Durham,
          where it was found in 1827. Hence St. Cuthbert is often represented
          holding St. Oswald's head in his hands.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_351" id="note_351" class="pginternal">351.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Bamborough: cf. c. 6, note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_352" id="note_352" class="pginternal">352.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Bishop of Hexham, 709-731:
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XX">V, 20</a> (cf. also <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XIV">IV, 14</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XIX">V, 19</a>). He was a much loved friend of Bede, many
          of whose works were undertaken at his instigation. He was devotedly
          attached to Wilfrid, whom he succeeded at Hexham. The <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Continuation"><span class="tei tei-q">“Continuation”</span></a> says that he was expelled
          from his see in 731, and he probably never regained it.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_353" id="note_353" class="pginternal">353.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. V. 19, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg353">353</a>. This was probably Wilfrid's third journey to
          Rome, undertaken in 703-704, for, at the time of his earlier
          journey (in 678), when he spent the winter in Frisland, Wilbrord
          was not yet there.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_354" id="note_354" class="pginternal">354.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The great missionary archbishop of the
          Frisians. He was trained as a boy in Wilfrid's abbey at Ripon,
          studied some time in Ireland, and with eleven companions undertook
          in 690 the mission to Frisland planned by Egbert: <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> V,
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_X">10</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XI">11</a>. (For Egbert,
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> c. 4, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg143">143</a>, and note.)</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_355" id="note_355" class="pginternal">355.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The third of Ethelfrid's seven sons
          (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> Sax. Chron.) to succeed to
          the sovereignty. With his brothers he had spent his youth in
          banishment among the Picts and Scots (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span> c.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_I">1</a>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_356" id="note_356" class="pginternal">356.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cc. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXI">21</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXIV">24</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXV">25</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXVIII">28</a>. The pupil and friend of Wilfrid. He was made
          sub-king of Deira in place of Ethelwald (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> next
          note). The date and circumstances of his rebellion are not known. A
          cross at Bewcastle in Cumberland, erected in 670 or 671,
          commemorates him and asks prayers for his soul.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_357" id="note_357" class="pginternal">357.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ethelwald, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> cc.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXIII">23</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXIV">24</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_358" id="note_358" class="pginternal">358.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_III">II, 3</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_359" id="note_359" class="pginternal">359.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The first bishop of English birth. For
          Honorius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XV">II, 15</a>, note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_360" id="note_360" class="pginternal">360.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The apostate king of Deira, Osric, son
          of Aelfric, was first cousin to Edwin (cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_I">1</a>). Oswald united the
          two Northumbrian kingdoms, but at his death, Oswin, son of Osric,
          succeeded to Deira. He was canonised, and his tragic death led him
          to be regarded as a martyr.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_361" id="note_361" class="pginternal">361.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Not identified. The village
          (<span class="tei tei-q">“a vico Cataractone”</span>) is probably
          the one called Cataracta in <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XIV">II, 14</a> (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> note, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          loc.</span></span>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_362" id="note_362" class="pginternal">362.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Comes</span></span>, A.S. <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">gesith</span></span>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_363" id="note_363" class="pginternal">363.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">At Queen Eanfled's request
          (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> c. 24, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg191">191</a>). The place is generally identified
          with Gilling in the North Riding of Yorkshire. For the form of the
          name, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> II, 14, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg119">119</a>, note 5.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_364" id="note_364" class="pginternal">364.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">In 651 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span> Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIV">V. 24</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_365" id="note_365" class="pginternal">365.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXI">21</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_366" id="note_366" class="pginternal">366.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">II, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_IX">9</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XX">20</a>; III, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXIV">24</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXV">25</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXIX">29</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_IX">V, 19</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_367" id="note_367" class="pginternal">367.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The monastery of Wearmouth and Jarrow.
          Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XVIII">IV, 18</a>;
          V, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXI">21</a>
<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          init.</span></span>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIV">24</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_368" id="note_368" class="pginternal">368.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Bamborough, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> cc.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_VI">6</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XII">12</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_369" id="note_369" class="pginternal">369.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The scene of St. Cuthbert's hermit
          life: <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> IV, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXVII">27</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXVIII">28</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXIX">29</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_I">V, 1</a>. It is called the
          <span class="tei tei-q">“House Island,”</span> and is the largest
          of the Farne group of seventeen islands off the coast of
          Northumberland, opposite Bamborough, famous in modern times for the
          rescue of a shipwrecked crew by Grace Darling.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_370" id="note_370" class="pginternal">370.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.l.</span></span> seventeen. The MS.
          authority is about equal; but cf. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">infra</span></span>,
          the statement that he died in the seventeenth year of his
          episcopate, which seems to be correct.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_371" id="note_371" class="pginternal">371.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">651 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span> c.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XIV">14</a>
<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          fin.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_372" id="note_372" class="pginternal">372.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cc. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXI">21</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXII">22</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXV">25</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXVI">26</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXVII">27</a>. For his character, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> c.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXV">25</a> (though
          some suppose the reference to be to Ronan). For Hii, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> c.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_III">3</a>, note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_373" id="note_373" class="pginternal">373.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The church and the buttress were
          evidently both of wood.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_374" id="note_374" class="pginternal">374.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">He probably refers to the <span class="tei tei-q">“De Temporum Ratione,”</span> the longer of his two
          chronological works. It treats the Paschal question at length. But
          in the <span class="tei tei-q">“De Temporibus”</span> he also
          briefly discusses it.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_375" id="note_375" class="pginternal">375.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_III">3</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_376" id="note_376" class="pginternal">376.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XV">II, 15</a>, and note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_377" id="note_377" class="pginternal">377.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ib.</span></span> The
          school was probably in the episcopal city of Dunwich, though it has
          been maintained that it was the origin of Cambridge University. For
          this there seems to be no authority except a seventeenth century
          addition to this passage in a twelfth or thirteenth century MS:
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Grantebrig schola a Sigberto
          Rege.”</span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_378" id="note_378" class="pginternal">378.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. 7, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg149">149</a>, and note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_379" id="note_379" class="pginternal">379.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">For a full account of St. Fursa and
          his brothers, and other companions mentioned in this chapter,
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> Miss Margaret Stokes's
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Three months in the Forests of France, a
          pilgrimage in search of vestiges of the Irish Saints in
          France.”</span> Bede's narrative is taken from an extant ancient
          Latin life of St. Fursa (or Fursey), the <span class="tei tei-q">“libellus de vita ejus conscriptus”</span> to which he
          refers several times (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v. infra</span></span>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_380" id="note_380" class="pginternal">380.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">St. Matt., xxv, 13.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_381" id="note_381" class="pginternal">381.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Burgh Castle in Suffolk, where there
          was a Roman fortress, Garianonum.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_382" id="note_382" class="pginternal">382.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span>, Irish.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_383" id="note_383" class="pginternal">383.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">His monastery on Lough Corrib. It is
          obvious from the sequel that this vision was prior to his journey
          to Britain, and is distinct from the vision mentioned above.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_384" id="note_384" class="pginternal">384.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ps. lxxxiv, 7; (lxxxiii, 8, in the
          Vulgate). The reading is that of the Vulgate and the Gallican
          Psalter: <span class="tei tei-q">“Ibunt de virtute in virtutem:
          videbitur Deus deorum in Sion.”</span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_385" id="note_385" class="pginternal">385.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ibid.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_386" id="note_386" class="pginternal">386.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span>, Ireland.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_387" id="note_387" class="pginternal">387.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The monastery at Burgh Castle.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_388" id="note_388" class="pginternal">388.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Fullan, or Foillan, was apparently a
          bishop (the others are called <span class="tei tei-q">“presbyteri”</span>). He and Ultan after Fursa's death
          (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">circ.</span></span> 650) went to South
          Brabant. Ultan founded a monastery at Fosse in the diocese of Liège
          (then of Maestricht), and Fullan laboured in conjunction with St.
          Gertrude in the double monastery of Nivelles. Ultan became abbot,
          first of Fosse and later of Péronne. The name Gobban occurs
          frequently in Irish Church History, Dicull occasionally. There is a
          Dicull mentioned in <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XIII">IV, 13</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_389" id="note_389" class="pginternal">389.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span>, the Mercians; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span> c.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XVIII">18</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_390" id="note_390" class="pginternal">390.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Clovis II, King of Neustria, 638-656.
          Ercinwald was his Mayor of the Palace.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_391" id="note_391" class="pginternal">391.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Lagny on the Marne, near Paris.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_392" id="note_392" class="pginternal">392.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Péronne on the Somme. The monastery
          founded there after his death was called <span class="tei tei-q">“Perrona Scotorum”</span> from the number of Irish who
          resorted to it.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_393" id="note_393" class="pginternal">393.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Circ.</span></span> 647. The rapid increase in
          the number of native bishops may be seen from this chapter. The
          only one before Thomas was Ithamar (cf. c. 14, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg164">164</a>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_394" id="note_394" class="pginternal">394.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The Fen country. The province included
          part of the counties of Lincoln, Northampton, Huntingdon, and
          Cambridge.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_395" id="note_395" class="pginternal">395.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Such changes of name were frequent:
          cf. Benedict for Biscop (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XVIII">IV, 18</a>), Boniface for Winfrid (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Continuation"><span class="tei tei-q">“Continuation”</span></a>), Clement for Wilbrord
          (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XI">V, 11</a>), and cf.
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">infra</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“Deusdedit.”</span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_396" id="note_396" class="pginternal">396.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XV">II, 15</a>, note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_397" id="note_397" class="pginternal">397.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The first archbishop of English birth.
          He died in 664 (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_I">IV, 1</a>). His original name is said to have
          been Frithonas; Deusdedit is the Latin form of Theodore. There was
          a Pope of the same name, 615-618 (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_VII">II, 7</a>). Similar
          names were common in the African Church, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">e.g.</span></span>,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Adeodatus,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Habetdeus,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Quodvultdeus,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Deogratias.”</span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_398" id="note_398" class="pginternal">398.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XIV">14</a>, and note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_399" id="note_399" class="pginternal">399.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_II">IV, 2</a>. It has been supposed that he died of the
          plague of 664. After his death the see was vacant for several
          years. It is remarkable that he came of a race which had not yet
          become Christian. The South Saxons continued to be pagan till
          Wilfrid evangelized them, 681-686 (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XIII">IV, 13</a>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_400" id="note_400" class="pginternal">400.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">For their origin, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XV">I, 15</a>. Their
          country, which was subject to Mercia, was the present
          Leicestershire. They are probably to be identified with the
          Southern Mercians; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXIV">24</a>, where we find
          Peada confirmed by Oswy in the government of that people.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_401" id="note_401" class="pginternal">401.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">She caused his death by treachery:
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXIV">24</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          fin.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_402" id="note_402" class="pginternal">402.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">C. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XIV">14</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad init.</span></span>, and note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_403" id="note_403" class="pginternal">403.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">After Alchfrid's death, she took the
          veil and ruled the monastery of Caistor (? Cyneburgacaster) in
          Northamptonshire. She was one of the five children of the heathen
          Penda, who were canonized as saints.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_404" id="note_404" class="pginternal">404.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Comitibus ac
          militibus.</span></span> A.S. <span class="tei tei-q">“geferum”</span> (companions) and <span class="tei tei-q">“king's thegns.”</span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_405" id="note_405" class="pginternal">405.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXII">22</a>. Variously identified with Walton and
          Walbottle, both near Newcastle. For the preposition, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> II,
          14, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg119">119</a>, note 5.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_406" id="note_406" class="pginternal">406.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">For Cedd, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Preface">Preface</a>, and
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">infra</span></span> cc. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXII">22</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXIII">23</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXV">25</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXVI">26</a>. The names of Adda
          and Betti do not occur again. For Diuma: <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.
          infra</span></span> and c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXIV">24</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_407" id="note_407" class="pginternal">407.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XV">III, 15</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_408" id="note_408" class="pginternal">408.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Gateshead on the Tyne, opposite
          Newcastle. For the preposition, cf. II, 14, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg119">119</a>, note 5.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_409" id="note_409" class="pginternal">409.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Penda was killed in 655. Diuma was
          probably consecrated in 656.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_410" id="note_410" class="pginternal">410.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Not identified. Perhaps Repton
          (Reppington) in Derbyshire, where it is supposed that Diuma had
          fixed his see. For the form of the name, cf. II, 14, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg119">119</a>, note 5.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_411" id="note_411" class="pginternal">411.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">He probably returned at the time of
          the rebellion of Mercia in 658; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> c.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXIV">24</a>,
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          fin.</span></span> For Hii, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_III">3</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          fin.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_412" id="note_412" class="pginternal">412.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Abbot of Gilling. He was a kinsman of
          Oswin: <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> c. 24, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg191">191</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_413" id="note_413" class="pginternal">413.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_V">II, 5</a>. Since then, the East Saxons had remained
          pagan.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_414" id="note_414" class="pginternal">414.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Sometimes surnamed the <span class="tei tei-q">“Good.”</span> (He must not be confused with Sigbert,
          King of the East Angles, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XV">II, 15</a>, and III, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XVIII">18</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XIX">19</a>.) Sigbert the Little was the successor of the
          three young kings who expelled Mellitus (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_V">II, 5</a>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_415" id="note_415" class="pginternal">415.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">C. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXI">21</a> and note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_416" id="note_416" class="pginternal">416.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">C. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXI">21</a> and note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_417" id="note_417" class="pginternal">417.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">They must have been Celtic bishops,
          probably of the Irish Church and subject to the authority of Iona.
          Cedd seems to have had no fixed see. He is not called Bishop of
          London, like Mellitus.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_418" id="note_418" class="pginternal">418.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Dr. Bright regards this organization
          as a foreshadowing of the parochial system, which, however, was not
          thoroughly established till long after.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_419" id="note_419" class="pginternal">419.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Identified with the Roman military
          station, Othona, on the Blackwater, formerly called the Pant, in
          Essex. The town is now submerged.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_420" id="note_420" class="pginternal">420.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Tilbury.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_421" id="note_421" class="pginternal">421.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Comes.</span></span> A.S. <span class="tei tei-q">“gesith.”</span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_422" id="note_422" class="pginternal">422.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">He was his brother probably. But the
          relationships of these East Saxon kings are very difficult to
          determine.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_423" id="note_423" class="pginternal">423.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Rendlesham in Suffolk.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_424" id="note_424" class="pginternal">424.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Distinguish from Ethelwald, or
          Oidilwald, sub-King of Deira (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XIV">14</a>, and <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">infra</span></span>
          cc. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXIII">23</a>,
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXIV">24</a>).
          Ethelwald, King of the East Angles, succeeded his brother,
          Ethelhere, who was the successor of Anna (cf. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">supra</span></span>
          cc. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_VII">7</a>,
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XVIII">18</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XIX">19</a>), and was killed in
          the battle of the Winwaed (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v. infra</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXIV">24</a>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_425" id="note_425" class="pginternal">425.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">supra</span></span>
          c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XIV">14</a>;
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">infra</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXIV">24</a>. Apparently he
          succeeded Oswin as sub-King of Deira.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_426" id="note_426" class="pginternal">426.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Isaiah, xxxv, 7.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_427" id="note_427" class="pginternal">427.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Lastingham (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Preface">Preface</a>). Cedd was its
          first abbot, though it was not in his own diocese.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_428" id="note_428" class="pginternal">428.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Doubtless only one at a time. The
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Provost”</span> is the prior of later
          times. The charge of the monastery would devolve upon him while
          Cedd was absent in his diocese.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_429" id="note_429" class="pginternal">429.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Or, as he is commonly called, St.
          Chad, the greatest of this remarkable group of brothers;
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Preface">Preface</a> and <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">infra passim</span></span>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_430" id="note_430" class="pginternal">430.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ythancaestir, or Tilbury (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> c.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXII">22</a>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_431" id="note_431" class="pginternal">431.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Oswald; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span> c.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_IX">9</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_432" id="note_432" class="pginternal">432.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-q">“Ealdormen,”</span> Green, <span class="tei tei-q">“Making of England,”</span> p. 301. But they probably
          included many British chiefs (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> Nennius, and cf. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">infra</span></span>
<span class="tei tei-q">“duces regii”</span>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_433" id="note_433" class="pginternal">433.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Oswy's younger son. He succeeded his
          father in 670 or 671 (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_V">IV, 5</a>, and for the events of his reign,
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_V">IV, V</a>,
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">passim</span></span>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_434" id="note_434" class="pginternal">434.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The wife of Penda.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_435" id="note_435" class="pginternal">435.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cc. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XIV">14</a> and <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXIII">23</a>. The reason for his conduct is not
          explained. Probably he had hoped to establish his claims on
          Northumbria through Penda's assistance, but shrank from actually
          fighting against his country.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_436" id="note_436" class="pginternal">436.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXII">22</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad fin.</span></span>, note. How he gave
          occasion for the war is not known.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_437" id="note_437" class="pginternal">437.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The river has not been identified, and
          there is great uncertainty even with regard to the district. Below,
          Bede says that Oswy concluded the war in the district of
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Loidis,”</span> by which he must mean
          Leeds, as in <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XIV">II,
          14</a>, and most commentators adopt this view. In this case, the
          river may be the Aire, or more probably the Went, a tributary of
          the Don. Others believe the district to be the Lothians, following
          the account in Nennius, who describes Oswy as taking refuge before
          the battle in a city called Iudeu, supposed to be either Edinburgh
          or Carriden (cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XII">I,
          12</a>, note), and the river has been supposed to be the Avon in
          Linlithgow.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_438" id="note_438" class="pginternal">438.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">She is mentioned as joint-abbess with
          her mother, Eanfled, of the monastery of Whitby (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXVI">IV, 26</a>). Eddius calls
          her <span class="tei tei-q">“sapientissima virgo,”</span>
<span class="tei tei-q">“semper totius provinciae consolatrix
          optimaque consiliatrix.”</span> Her influence helped to restore
          Wilfrid to the bishopric. She was the friend of St. Cuthbert, who
          is said to have wrought a miraculous cure on her behalf. It was to
          her that he prophesied the death of her brother Egfrid (IV, 26, p.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg285">285</a>, note).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_439" id="note_439" class="pginternal">439.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Hartlepool in the county of Durham
          (cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXIII">IV,
          23</a>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_440" id="note_440" class="pginternal">440.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">For the main facts of her life,
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXIII">IV, 23</a>. She was Abbess of Whitby at the
          time of the Synod (c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXV">25</a>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_441" id="note_441" class="pginternal">441.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Whitby. It was a mixed monastery (cf.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXIII">IV, 23</a>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_442" id="note_442" class="pginternal">442.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The ancient life of Gregory the Great,
          by a monk of Whitby, tells how Edwin's body was translated thither
          from the place where he fell. For the fate of his head, cf.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XX">II, 20</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_443" id="note_443" class="pginternal">443.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">In 655: cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIV">V, 24</a> (death of
          Penda).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_444" id="note_444" class="pginternal">444.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXI">21</a>, where, however, Lindsey is not
          mentioned. For the successive conquests of Lindsey by Northumbria
          and Mercia, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> IV, 12, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg243">243</a>, note. Though it must have passed to
          Northumbria after Oswy's victory, it was still apparently included
          in the Mercian diocese.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_445" id="note_445" class="pginternal">445.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">C. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXI">21</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad fin.</span></span> and note. <span class="tei tei-q">“Scottia,”</span> as usual, means Ireland, which
          includes Iona (cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_IV">II, 4</a>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_446" id="note_446" class="pginternal">446.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XIV">14</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_447" id="note_447" class="pginternal">447.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span>, he confirmed Peada in the
          government conferred on him by his father, Penda, if we may assume
          the Southern Mercians to be identical with the Middle Angles: cf.
          c. 21, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg180">180</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_448" id="note_448" class="pginternal">448.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Alchfled, Oswy's daughter:
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ibid.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_449" id="note_449" class="pginternal">449.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">He has been already mentioned, cc.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_VII">7</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXI">21</a>. He was a vigorous
          ruler; he freed Mercia from Northumbria, reconquered Lindsey,
          established his supremacy over the East Saxons (cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXX">30</a>), and curtailed the
          power of Wessex. His attempt, however, to extend his power to the
          north of the Humber ended in 675 in his disastrous defeat by
          Egfrid, King of Northumbria (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XII">IV, 12</a>) and his death followed immediately after.
          He was the first Christian king of all Mercia, and he was zealous
          in putting down idolatry (Florence of Worcester).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_450" id="note_450" class="pginternal">450.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">supra</span></span>
          and c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXI">21</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_451" id="note_451" class="pginternal">451.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">He succeeded in 662. Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXX">30</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_452" id="note_452" class="pginternal">452.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">C. 23, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg187">187</a>, and note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_453" id="note_453" class="pginternal">453.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">IV, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_III">3</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_V">5</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_VI">6</a>. He was deposed by Theodore for some act of
          disobedience not known (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_VI">IV, 6</a>), and went to the Continent, where,
          travelling in Neustria, he was mistaken for Wilfrid and cruelly
          ill-treated by the emissaries of Ebroin (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XIX">V, 19</a>, note),
          <span class="tei tei-q">“errore bono unius syllabae
          seducti,”</span> as Eddius, the biographer of Wilfrid,
          remarks.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_454" id="note_454" class="pginternal">454.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span>, Ireland.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_455" id="note_455" class="pginternal">455.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">He succeeded Cuthbert as Bishop of
          Lindisfarne; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> IV, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXIX">29</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXX">30</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_456" id="note_456" class="pginternal">456.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. II, 2, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg084">84</a>, note 3.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_457" id="note_457" class="pginternal">457.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Nothing certain is known of him.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_458" id="note_458" class="pginternal">458.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">II, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XVI">16</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XX">20</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_II">IV, 2</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_459" id="note_459" class="pginternal">459.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span>, Iona: cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_IV">IV, 4</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          init.</span></span> Colman succeeded in 661.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_460" id="note_460" class="pginternal">460.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">For his life: <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XIX">V, 19</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_461" id="note_461" class="pginternal">461.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Really Annemundus. He was Archbishop
          of Lyons. Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_VIII">V,
          8</a>, note on Godwin. He is confused with his brother Dalfinus,
          Count of Lyons: <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> V, 19, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg348">348</a>, note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_462" id="note_462" class="pginternal">462.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ripon. For the preposition, cf. II,
          14, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg119">119</a>, note 5. The
          monastery was first given to Eata (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> c.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXVI">26</a>), to be
          organized by him, and among the monks he brought with him from
          Melrose was Cuthbert (cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXVII">IV, 27</a>). They were forced to retire in 661, but
          after the Synod of Whitby they conformed to the Catholic
          rules.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_463" id="note_463" class="pginternal">463.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_VII">7</a>, where Bede's summary account obscures
          the sequence of events. Here he is still called Bishop of the West
          Saxons. It is probable that he had retired from Wessex by this
          time, but had not yet gone to Gaul. He did not become Bishop of
          Paris before 666, for in that year we find his predecessor,
          Importunus, witnessing a <span class="tei tei-q">“privilegium”</span> for a nunnery at Soissons.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_464" id="note_464" class="pginternal">464.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">We hear nothing more of this
          priest.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_465" id="note_465" class="pginternal">465.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">C. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXIV">24</a>. The etymology is generally considered
          impossible. But cf. Bright, <span class="tei tei-q">“Early English
          Church History,”</span> p. 213.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_466" id="note_466" class="pginternal">466.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">C. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXIV">24</a>. After the Synod it appears that she
          conformed to the Catholic usages. But she continued to be an
          opponent of Wilfrid till the end of her life.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_467" id="note_467" class="pginternal">467.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cc. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXI">21</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXII">22</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXIII">23</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_468" id="note_468" class="pginternal">468.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The practice of the churches of Asia,
          traditionally derived from St. John, was to disregard the day of
          the week and observe as Easter Day the 14th of the month Nisan.
          Therefore the claim to the authority of St. John, advanced by the
          Celts, was inaccurate and gives some colour to the charge, often
          brought against them, of being <span class="tei tei-q">“Quartodecimans.”</span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_469" id="note_469" class="pginternal">469.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Acts, xvi, 3.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_470" id="note_470" class="pginternal">470.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ibid.</span></span>, xxi, 26.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_471" id="note_471" class="pginternal">471.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ibid.</span></span>, xviii, 18.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_472" id="note_472" class="pginternal">472.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ibid.</span></span>, xxi, 20.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_473" id="note_473" class="pginternal">473.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XIX">II, 19</a>, note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_474" id="note_474" class="pginternal">474.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_III">3</a>, note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_475" id="note_475" class="pginternal">475.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">St. Matt., xvi, 18-19.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_476" id="note_476" class="pginternal">476.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. II, 2, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg085">85</a>, note 1.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_477" id="note_477" class="pginternal">477.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">To Iona; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_IV">IV, 4</a>,
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          init.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_478" id="note_478" class="pginternal">478.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Fourth Bishop of Lindisfarne and the
          last of the Irish bishops in that see. He died of the plague in
          664: <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXVII">27</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_479" id="note_479" class="pginternal">479.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. 3, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg139">139</a>, and note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_480" id="note_480" class="pginternal">480.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span>, Ireland.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_481" id="note_481" class="pginternal">481.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">IV, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XII">12</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXVII">27</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XVIII">28</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_II">V, 2</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_482" id="note_482" class="pginternal">482.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Old Melrose, <span class="tei tei-q">“Quod Tuidi fluminis circumflexu maxima ex parte
          clauditur,”</span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XII">V, 12</a>. The more famous monastery is of later date
          and is to the west of the older site.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_483" id="note_483" class="pginternal">483.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_III">3</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad fin.</span></span> (where, however, there
          is only a general allusion to the instruction of English children).
          It has been suggested that they may have been redeemed from
          slavery. Cf. c. 5, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg145">145</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_484" id="note_484" class="pginternal">484.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Really on the 1st.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_485" id="note_485" class="pginternal">485.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Called the <span class="tei tei-q">“Yellow Pest”</span> from the colour of its victims. It
          was a bubonic plague; it probably came from the East and was the
          same as that which raged in Europe in Justinian's reign. There were
          several outbreaks in England in the seventh century, but this was
          the most virulent. For subsequent visitations, cf. IV, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_VII">7</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XIV">14</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XIX">19</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_486" id="note_486" class="pginternal">486.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. 26, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg201">201</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_487" id="note_487" class="pginternal">487.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The Saxon Chronicle has <span class="tei tei-q">“on Wagele,”</span> which is supposed to be Whalley, on
          the borders of Lancashire, Cheshire, and Yorkshire, but the name
          varies greatly in different chroniclers. Smith considers that
          Bede's form <span class="tei tei-q">“Paegnalaech”</span> or
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Paegnalech”</span> points to Finchale
          (Wincanheale, in Simeon of Durham, or Pincahala), near Durham.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_488" id="note_488" class="pginternal">488.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_IV">4</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_489" id="note_489" class="pginternal">489.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XI">11</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XII">IV, 12</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_490" id="note_490" class="pginternal">490.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Said, on doubtful authority, to be
          Melfont, or Mellifont, in County Louth.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_491" id="note_491" class="pginternal">491.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-q">“Acceptum
          sacerdotii gradum,”</span> A.S. <span class="tei tei-q">“biscophade
          onfeng”</span> = he received the episcopate. Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_IV">4</a>, note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_492" id="note_492" class="pginternal">492.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">In 664. This was the young
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Fainéant”</span> king of Neustria,
          Clothaire III. Wilfrid was probably sent abroad at his own request.
          Doubtless he desired to have the canonical number of three bishops
          at his consecration, and Boniface of Dunwich (c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XX">20</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_V">IV, 5</a>) was the only
          prelate in England whose orders he would have regarded as entirely
          satisfactory, for Wini might be considered a usurper, and Cedd and
          Jaruman had been consecrated by schismatics. Archbishop Deusdedit
          was dead (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XX">III,
          20</a>, note) and so probably was Damian of Rochester.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_493" id="note_493" class="pginternal">493.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">He was Wilfrid's friend: <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span> c.
          25, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg194">194-5</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_494" id="note_494" class="pginternal">494.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ibid.</span></span>,
          note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_495" id="note_495" class="pginternal">495.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Compiègne, a royal <span class="tei tei-q">“villa.”</span> For the preposition, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XIV">II, 14</a>, note.
          The ceremony was a specially magnificent one, Wilfrid being carried
          in a golden chair by twelve bishops in choral procession, according
          to an ancient custom of the Gallican Church.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_496" id="note_496" class="pginternal">496.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Preface">Preface</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXIII">III, 23</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">et saep.</span></span> Why Oswy, who had
          consented to Wilfrid's consecration (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XIX">V, 19</a>) acted in
          this manner is not clear. Probably it implies that the Celtic
          party, during Wilfrid's prolonged absence, had to some extent
          recovered their ascendency; and, if it was at this time that
          Alchfrid (who is not heard of again) rebelled against his father
          (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XIV">14</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          init.</span></span>) and was deprived of his kingdom, Wilfrid would
          have lost his warmest supporter.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_497" id="note_497" class="pginternal">497.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">He retired to Ripon from Lindsey, of
          which he was the first separate bishop, when Ethelred recovered
          that province for Mercia in 679. But cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XII">IV, 12</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          fin.</span></span>, note, for the statement that he was
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Bishop”</span> of Ripon.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_498" id="note_498" class="pginternal">498.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">King of Northumbria, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span> c.
          24, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg188">188</a>, note 3.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_499" id="note_499" class="pginternal">499.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">It does not appear why Boniface
          (Bertgils) of Dunwich, Bishop of the East Angles, 652-669 (c.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XX">20</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_V">IV, 5</a>), is ignored.
          Ceadda's consecration was afterwards regarded as of doubtful
          validity and was completed by Theodore (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XII">IV, 12</a>). The
          British (probably Cornish) bishops were schismatical, and Wini's
          position was irregular. Moreover, the see to which Ceadda was
          consecrated was not vacant.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_500" id="note_500" class="pginternal">500.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_I">IV, 1</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_501" id="note_501" class="pginternal">501.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Consecrated in 657—died in 672.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_502" id="note_502" class="pginternal">502.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Isaiah, xi, 10.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_503" id="note_503" class="pginternal">503.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ibid.</span></span>, xlix, 1.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_504" id="note_504" class="pginternal">504.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ibid.</span></span>, 6.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_505" id="note_505" class="pginternal">505.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ibid.</span></span>, 7.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_506" id="note_506" class="pginternal">506.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ibid.</span></span>, 8-9.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_507" id="note_507" class="pginternal">507.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ibid.</span></span>, xlii, 6-7. The readings
          are from the Vulgate.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_508" id="note_508" class="pginternal">508.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">It has not been stated that Oswy and
          Egbert asked the Pope to provide an archbishop, failing Wighard.
          But this seems to be implied in <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_I">IV, 1</a>: <span class="tei tei-q">“episcopum, quem
          petierant.”</span> Or, as is generally supposed, Vitalian may have
          arbitrarily assumed this to be the intention of their letter.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_509" id="note_509" class="pginternal">509.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">There were several martyrs of the name
          of Laurentius, but the best known is the Roman deacon, St.
          Laurence, who suffered at Rome in 258 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span> He was buried in the
          Via Tiburtina, where a church dedicated to him is said to have been
          founded by Constantine the Great. On the site stands the present
          Church of S. Lorenzo fuori le Mura, the older part of which dates
          from the sixth century at least. One of Aldhelm's foundations
          (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XVIII">V, 18</a>) was a
          little church dedicated to St. Laurence at Bradford-on-Avon in 705,
          probably the small Saxon church which still stands there. There
          were many martyrs named John and Paul, and more than one Gregory.
          St. Pancras was a boy-martyr, a Phrygian by birth, who suffered at
          Rome in 304 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>, when he was only
          fourteen years of age. His martyrdom was widely celebrated, and
          miraculous powers were attributed to his tomb outside the walls of
          Rome. An old British church at Canterbury, which had been
          desecrated by the heathen invaders, was restored for Christian use
          and dedicated to St. Pancras by Augustine.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_510" id="note_510" class="pginternal">510.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Eanfled, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span> c.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XV">15</a> and
          note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_511" id="note_511" class="pginternal">511.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">St. Matt., vi, 33.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_512" id="note_512" class="pginternal">512.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_VI">IV, 6</a>. Sighere was the son, Sebbi the brother, of
          Sigbert the Little (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXII">22</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          init.</span></span>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_513" id="note_513" class="pginternal">513.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">C. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXII">22</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad fin.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_514" id="note_514" class="pginternal">514.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">C. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXIV">24</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad fin.</span></span>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_III">IV, 3</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_515" id="note_515" class="pginternal">515.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">664 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>: cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXVII">III, 27</a>,
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          init.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_516" id="note_516" class="pginternal">516.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXVI">III, 26</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          init.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_517" id="note_517" class="pginternal">517.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XX">III, 20</a> and note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_518" id="note_518" class="pginternal">518.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_VIII">III, 8</a>; V, 19, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg348">348</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_519" id="note_519" class="pginternal">519.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXIX">III, 29</a>. From Bede's <span class="tei tei-q">“History of the Abbots”</span> we learn that he was a
          pupil of Pope Gregory's Roman disciples in Kent.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_520" id="note_520" class="pginternal">520.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXIX">III, 29</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_521" id="note_521" class="pginternal">521.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ibid.</span></span>, and note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_522" id="note_522" class="pginternal">522.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. Preface, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg002">2</a>, note 3.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_523" id="note_523" class="pginternal">523.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">He was probably chaplain of the
          nunnery.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_524" id="note_524" class="pginternal">524.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. Preface, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg002">2</a>, note 2.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_525" id="note_525" class="pginternal">525.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. Bright, cc. 252, 253. He sees here
          an allusion to the Monothelite controversy.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_526" id="note_526" class="pginternal">526.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span>, the Eastern, which
          consisted in shaving the whole head. This method was supposed to
          have the authority of St. Paul (an idea derived from Acts, xviii,
          18), and of St. James <span class="tei tei-q">“the Less.”</span>
          Cf. II, 2, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg085">85</a>,
          note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_527" id="note_527" class="pginternal">527.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">They were accompanied by Benedict
          Biscop (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XVIII">18</a>) whom Vitalian had
          asked to act as their guide and interpreter (<span class="tei tei-q">“Hist. Abb.,”</span> § 3).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_528" id="note_528" class="pginternal">528.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Archbishop of Arles, 658-675.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_529" id="note_529" class="pginternal">529.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">From this it has been inferred that
          Arles belonged to Neustria. The king was Clothaire III, king of
          Neustria. Ebroin had succeeded Ercinwald (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XIX">III, 19</a>,
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          fin.</span></span>) as Mayor of the Palace. He was murdered in
          681.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_530" id="note_530" class="pginternal">530.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">III, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_VII">7</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXV">25</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXVI">26</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXVIII">28</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_531" id="note_531" class="pginternal">531.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Called also Emmo, or Haymo; Bishop of
          Sens, 658-675.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_532" id="note_532" class="pginternal">532.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Or Burgundofarus, Bishop of Meaux,
          626-672. He was brother of Fara, mentioned <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_VIII">III, 8</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_533" id="note_533" class="pginternal">533.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-q">“Praefectus.”</span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_534" id="note_534" class="pginternal">534.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Etaples in Picardy; <span class="tei tei-q">“Quentae (or <span class="tei tei-q">‘ad
          Quantiam’</span>) vicus”</span> = the village at the mouth of the
          Canche. It was an important commercial town and port.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_535" id="note_535" class="pginternal">535.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">SS. Peter and Paul (St. Augustine's):
          cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XXXIII">I, 33</a>.
          Theodore had placed Benedict Biscop over it while Hadrian was still
          abroad.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_536" id="note_536" class="pginternal">536.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">II, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XVI">16</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XX">20</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_537" id="note_537" class="pginternal">537.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Eddius, the biographer of Wilfrid. He
          mentions himself (<span class="tei tei-q">“Life of Wilfrid,”</span>
          Chapter XIV) as a <span class="tei tei-q">“cantor.”</span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_538" id="note_538" class="pginternal">538.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Bede can scarcely mean to impeach the
          orthodoxy of the bishops of native birth prior to Wilfrid. Probably
          the reference is mainly to the prominent part he took in bringing
          about the decision at Whitby.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_539" id="note_539" class="pginternal">539.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXVIII">III, 28</a>, note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_540" id="note_540" class="pginternal">540.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XX">III, 20</a>, and note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_541" id="note_541" class="pginternal">541.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cc. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_V">5</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XII">12</a>. Florence of Worcester mentions a Putta,
          Bishop of Hereford, who died in 688, but it is very doubtful
          whether he can be identified with the above. Bede's words in
          Chapter <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XII">12</a> do
          not imply that Putta, Bishop of Rochester, became Bishop of
          Hereford. Hereford was not one of the five sees into which Florence
          tells us that Theodore divided the great Mercian bishopric, but it
          appears soon after as a separate see for Hecana (Herefordshire).
          Possibly Putta, who is traditionally reckoned as its first bishop,
          may have acted as Sexwulf's deputy there.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_542" id="note_542" class="pginternal">542.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XX">II, 20</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad fin.</span></span>, note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_543" id="note_543" class="pginternal">543.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">III, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXIV">24</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXX">30</a>. He had probably died two years before Chad's
          appointment, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">i.e.</span></span>, in 667, and the see had
          been vacant in the interval, for Wilfrid, then in retirement at
          Ripon, is said (by Eddius) to have discharged episcopal functions
          for the Mercians.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_544" id="note_544" class="pginternal">544.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Lastingham. Cf. Preface, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg003">3</a>; III, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXIII">23</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXVIII">28</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_545" id="note_545" class="pginternal">545.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Lindsey at this time belonged to
          Mercia. Cf. c. 12, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg243">243</a>,
          note 5.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_546" id="note_546" class="pginternal">546.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Smith believed this place to be
          Barton-on-Humber. It is now generally identified with Barrow in
          Lincolnshire. For the preposition, cf. II, 14, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg119">119</a>, note 5.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_547" id="note_547" class="pginternal">547.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">It had not previously been an
          episcopal see, though Wulfhere had wished to establish Wilfrid
          there during the vacancy in the Mercian bishopric (p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg218">218</a>, note 4). When the bishopric
          of Mercia and Lindsey was subdivided by Theodore in 679, Lichfield
          remained the see of the bishopric of Mercia proper. In 787, under
          Offa, King of Mercia, with the consent of Pope Hadrian, it was
          raised into a separate archbishopric for Mercia and East Anglia,
          but in 802 Canterbury was re-established as the sole archbishopric
          for the Southern Province. The popular derivation of the name,
          Lichfield (<span class="tei tei-q">“Field of the Dead”</span>) is
          from <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">lic</span></span> = a corpse, and the place is
          traditionally connected with the martyrdom of a great number of
          British Christians. Another derivation, however (from <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">leccian</span></span> = to irrigate), points
          to the meaning <span class="tei tei-q">“the watered
          field.”</span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_548" id="note_548" class="pginternal">548.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Eccl., iii. 5.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_549" id="note_549" class="pginternal">549.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A stone which is believed to have
          formed part of Owini's tomb was found at the end of the eighteenth
          century at Haddenham, near Ely, and is now in Ely Cathedral. It
          bears the inscription, <span class="tei tei-q">“Lucem tuam Ovino da
          Deus et requiem. Amen”</span> (Mayor and Lumley).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_550" id="note_550" class="pginternal">550.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XIX">19</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_551" id="note_551" class="pginternal">551.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ps. xviii, 13, 14.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_552" id="note_552" class="pginternal">552.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">III, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_IV">4</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXVII">27</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_553" id="note_553" class="pginternal">553.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">He is said to have been Abbot of
          Bardney.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_554" id="note_554" class="pginternal">554.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">In 672. The original Church of St.
          Mary at Lichfield, said to have been built by Oswy in 656-657, was
          replaced about 1140 by the new Cathedral, and Ceadda's relics were
          soon after removed to it.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_555" id="note_555" class="pginternal">555.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXIV">III, 24</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          fin.</span></span>, note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_556" id="note_556" class="pginternal">556.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXVI">III, 26</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          init.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_557" id="note_557" class="pginternal">557.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Iona. Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_III">III, 3</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          fin.</span></span>, note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_558" id="note_558" class="pginternal">558.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Innisboffin, off the coast of Mayo.
          The annals of Ulster give 667 as the date of his retirement to
          it.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_559" id="note_559" class="pginternal">559.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Mayo, called from this settlement,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Mayo of the Saxons.”</span> It continued
          to be an English monastery (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v. infra</span></span>), and after awhile
          adopted those usages, to avoid which Colman had left England. It
          became an episcopal see, which in 1559 was annexed to the
          archbishopric of Tuam.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_560" id="note_560" class="pginternal">560.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Hertford.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_561" id="note_561" class="pginternal">561.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">It seems probable that we ought to
          read 671; cf. Plummer <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad loc.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_562" id="note_562" class="pginternal">562.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Oswy is the last king in Bede's list
          of those who held an <span class="tei tei-q">“imperium”</span>
          (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_V">II, 5</a>). With the rise of Mercia under
          Wulfhere (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXIV">III,
          24</a>), the supremacy of Northumbria had virtually passed away.
          After Oswy's death, the position of Northumbria was an isolated
          one, and it was by conquests over Britons, not Englishmen, that
          Egfrid enlarged the bounds of his kingdom.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_563" id="note_563" class="pginternal">563.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">In his youth he had been a hostage at
          the court of Queen Cynwise, wife of Penda (III, 24, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg188">188</a>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_564" id="note_564" class="pginternal">564.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This is of supreme importance as the
          first English provincial Council and the first national assembly of
          the English. The rule laid down at Nicaea and confirmed by later
          councils was that provincial synods should meet twice a year to
          settle all ecclesiastical matters which affected the province as a
          unity.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_565" id="note_565" class="pginternal">565.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">24th September, 673, falls in the
          first indiction, whether the Pontifical or the <span class="tei tei-q">“Caesarean”</span> system is meant (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
          Haddan and Stubbs, III, 121). Bede himself used the Caesarean
          indiction, of which we get the first notice in his <span class="tei tei-q">“De Temporum Ratione.”</span> It began on 24th
          September. It does not, however, follow that Theodore also used it.
          The oldest scheme, viz., the Constantinopolitan, began on 1st
          September; the Roman or Pontifical, on New Year's Day as received
          at the time, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">i.e.</span></span>, 25th December, 1st
          January, or 21st March. For Indictions, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
<span class="tei tei-q">“Dictionary of Christian
          Antiquities.”</span> They were cycles of fifteen years, a mode of
          reckoning dates which appeared in the fourth century, based upon
          the Imperial fiscal system, but which came to be used irrespective
          of taxation. <span class="tei tei-q">“1st indiction”</span> stands
          for <span class="tei tei-q">“1st year of the
          indiction.”</span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_566" id="note_566" class="pginternal">566.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Of the six suffragans only four were
          present. Wilfrid was at this time (669-678) in possession of his
          see; why he did not appear in person is not explained. Possibly his
          action foreshadows the future troubles between him and Theodore.
          Wini, Bishop of London, was still alive (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_VII">III, 7</a>, and
          note). If the story of his retirement to Winchester is true, this
          would account for his absence. For Bisi, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.
          infra</span></span>. His see was at Dunwich (cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XV">II, 15</a>). For Putta,
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_II">2</a> and note; for
          Leutherius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_VII">III, 7</a>; for Wynfrid, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXIV">III, 24</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_III">IV, 3</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          fin.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_567" id="note_567" class="pginternal">567.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The collection of Canons approved by
          the Council of Chalcedon, translated into Latin by Dionysius
          Exiguus (early in the sixth century, cf. V, 21, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg369">369</a>, note) and adopted by the Western
          Church.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_568" id="note_568" class="pginternal">568.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This place used to be identified with
          Cliff-at-Hoe near Rochester, but the theory rests mainly on the
          similarity of name. As in the recorded Councils of Clovesho the
          supremacy of Mercia is clearly indicated, it is generally assumed
          that the place must have been either in Mercia or a kingdom subject
          to it, as Kent was at the time. Except one Council in 716, we find
          none mentioned as having taken place at Clovesho till seventy years
          after this time (747), but councils were held at other places.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_569" id="note_569" class="pginternal">569.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The subdivision of the great
          bishoprics was an important part of Theodore's policy, and though
          at this Council he failed to carry his point, possibly through the
          opposition of Wilfrid's representatives, in the succeeding years he
          effected a great change in the organization of the episcopate,
          creating dioceses co-extensive with tribal territories.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_570" id="note_570" class="pginternal">570.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXIX">III, 29</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_I">IV, 1</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_571" id="note_571" class="pginternal">571.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cc. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXII">22</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXVI">26</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_572" id="note_572" class="pginternal">572.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">His original name was Bertgils,
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XX">III, 20</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_573" id="note_573" class="pginternal">573.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Theodore availed himself of this
          opportunity for subdivision. Aecci was appointed to Dunwich and
          Badwin to the new see of Elmham. Suffolk and Norfolk thus each
          received a separate bishopric. The Danish invasions broke up this
          arrangement; Dunwich disappeared as an episcopal see, and the
          succession to Elmham was interrupted for a time. In 1075 the see of
          the single East Anglian bishopric was removed to Thetford, and in
          1094 to Norwich.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_574" id="note_574" class="pginternal">574.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">It has been conjectured that he
          resisted the subdivision of his diocese. For his subsequent
          adventures, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> III, 24, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg192">192</a>, note 4.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_575" id="note_575" class="pginternal">575.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This was probably in 675 (Flor. of
          Wor.). Sexwulf (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v. infra</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XII">12</a>) had been a rich
          thegn who became a monk and was made first abbot of
          Medeshamstead.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_576" id="note_576" class="pginternal">576.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Peterborough, as the town which grew
          up around the monastery came to be called in the tenth century, the
          monastery being dedicated to St. Peter. Peada is said to have
          planned the foundation (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> Peterborough additions to the
          Saxon Chronicle), but the accounts are late and untrustworthy.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_577" id="note_577" class="pginternal">577.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XX">III, 20</a>, note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_578" id="note_578" class="pginternal">578.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">C. 3, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg219">219</a>, note 2.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_579" id="note_579" class="pginternal">579.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">He succeeded Wini (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_VII">III, 7</a>) in 675 and
          died about 693. He was canonized. It was in his house that the
          reconciliation between Theodore and Wilfrid took place. It is said
          that as a boy he had heard Mellitus preach in London. He was
          present at the West Saxon Witenagemot which enacted the
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Dooms of Ine”</span> (c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XV">15</a> and <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_VII">V, 7</a>), and is spoken of
          as one of Ine's bishops, Essex being probably subject to Wessex at
          that time.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_580" id="note_580" class="pginternal">580.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">In <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXX">III, 30</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_581" id="note_581" class="pginternal">581.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cc. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_VII">7-10</a>. She is not to be confused with Ethelberg,
          daughter of Anna (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_VIII">III, 8</a>), Abbess of Faremoûtier-en-Brie.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_582" id="note_582" class="pginternal">582.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Chertsey in Surrey. William of
          Malmesbury tells us that it was a flourishing monastery till it was
          destroyed by the Danes.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_583" id="note_583" class="pginternal">583.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Barking in Essex, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.
          infra</span></span> cc. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_VII">7-10</a>. For the preposition, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> II,
          14, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg119">119</a>, note 5.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_584" id="note_584" class="pginternal">584.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The plague of 664 has been mentioned
          in <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXVII">III, 27</a>;
          IV, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_I">1</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_III">3</a>; but this may have
          been a later visitation. Barking is generally supposed to have been
          founded in 666.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_585" id="note_585" class="pginternal">585.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Two different dates are given for her
          succession, 664 and 675. If the former is right, the plague (c.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_VII">7</a>) must have
          been that of 664, and Ethelburg probably died of it. It appears
          from a letter of St. Boniface that Hildilid was alive in 709. She
          was one of Aldhelm's numerous women-scholars. He dedicated the
          prose version of his work in praise of virginity (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XVIII">V, 18</a>) to her
          and others of the sisterhood, and speaks highly of their scholarly
          attainments.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_586" id="note_586" class="pginternal">586.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Apparently a life of St. Ethelburg not
          known to exist now.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_587" id="note_587" class="pginternal">587.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXX">III, 30</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_VI">IV, 6</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_588" id="note_588" class="pginternal">588.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">For Earconwald, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span> c.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_VI">6</a>. Waldhere is
          the first of a long list of undistinguished bishops of London given
          by William of Malmesbury. A letter of his to Archbishop Bertwald
          survives, and there is a charter in which Swefred (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> next
          note) grants lands at Twickenham to him in 704.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_589" id="note_589" class="pginternal">589.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_VIII">V, 8</a>, note on Suaebhard.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_590" id="note_590" class="pginternal">590.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">St. Paul's, London. Sebbi's tomb is
          believed to have survived till the fire of 1666.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_591" id="note_591" class="pginternal">591.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">For these bishops, cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_VII">III, 7</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_592" id="note_592" class="pginternal">592.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ibid.</span></span> He died in 672 (Sax.
          Chron.). Of the sub-kings the most prominent were Aescwine and
          Centwine, a brother of Coinwalch. The Saxon Chronicle gives a
          different account. According to it, Coinwalch's widow, Sexburg,
          reigned for one year after him and was succeeded by Aescwine, who
          was succeeded by Centwine.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_593" id="note_593" class="pginternal">593.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_VII">III, 7</a>, and for his character, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XVIII">V, 18</a>. The Saxon
          Chronicle says he succeeded in 676 and died in 703. Bede places his
          death in 705 (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XVIII">V,
          18</a>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_594" id="note_594" class="pginternal">594.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cc. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XV">15</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XVI">16</a>, and <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_VII">V, 7</a>. He was of Ceaulin's line (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_V">II, 5</a>) and so belonged to
          a younger branch of the West Saxon royal house. Welsh writers
          confuse him with the British king, Caedwalla (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XX">II, 20</a>), and with his
          son, Cadwalader.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_595" id="note_595" class="pginternal">595.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A son of Penda. He succeeded his
          brother Wulfhere in 675. In 704 he became a monk (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIV">V, 24</a>) and afterwards
          Abbot of Bardney Monastery (cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XI">III, 11</a>), which he is said to have founded. His
          invasion of Kent was probably provoked by an attempt on the part of
          that kingdom, at Wulfhere's death, to resume a position of
          independence towards Mercia. In spite of his conduct on this raid,
          Theodore, Florence of Worcester, and others, speak of the
          saintliness of his character.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_596" id="note_596" class="pginternal">596.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cc. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_II">2</a> (and note), <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_V">5</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_597" id="note_597" class="pginternal">597.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">C. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_VI">6</a>, and note, and <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">infra</span></span>,
          p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg244">244</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_598" id="note_598" class="pginternal">598.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The dates of these changes in the
          episcopate are uncertain. Probably Gebmund was consecrated in 678.
          For his death, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_VIII">V, 8</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad fin.</span></span>, and note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_599" id="note_599" class="pginternal">599.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This was Wilfrid's first expulsion
          (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XIX">V, 19</a>). Bede's reticence on the subject is
          noteworthy. Egfrid's hostility to his former friend, Wilfrid, was
          doubtless caused by Wilfrid's encouragement of Queen Ethelthryth
          (cc. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XIX">19</a>,
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XX">20</a>) in her
          desire to take the veil. It was probably increased by Egfrid's
          second wife, Eormenburg, who is said to have resented Wilfrid's
          power and magnificence. Theodore, carrying out his policy of
          subdivision, availed himself of the opportunity afforded by this
          dissension. He consulted some of his suffragans (we do not know who
          they were; it was apparently at a mixed council of ecclesiastics
          and laymen), but did not communicate with Wilfrid, being, no doubt,
          conscious of the uselessness of trying to get his consent. Wilfrid,
          after demanding an explanation from the archbishop and the king in
          a Northumbrian <span class="tei tei-q">“gemot,”</span> and
          receiving no satisfaction, appealed to Rome (cf. V, 19, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg351">351</a>). For the importance of this
          step, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> Bright, <span class="tei tei-q">“Early English Church History,”</span> pp.
          323-326.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_600" id="note_600" class="pginternal">600.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Probably the intention was that
          Wilfrid should keep the larger part of Deira, with his see at York,
          and that three new dioceses should be formed. But, on his departure
          to appeal to Rome, it was assumed that he had resigned his
          bishopric, and Bosa was consecrated Bishop of Deira with his see at
          York, Eata, Bishop of the Bernicians, with the option of fixing his
          see either at Lindisfarne or Hagustald (Hexham). These two were
          <span class="tei tei-q">“substituted for him.”</span> Lindsey,
          which at this time belonged to Northumbria, became for the first
          time a separate diocese. When it passed again to Mercia in 679 it
          was included in the subdivision of the Mercian bishopric, and
          Ethelwin (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v. infra</span></span> note 6) became its
          bishop with his see at Sidnacaestir (generally identified with
          Stow, but the locality is unknown).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_601" id="note_601" class="pginternal">601.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">He was one of the bishops educated in
          Hilda's monastery (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXIII">23</a>). Bede speaks
          highly of him (V, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_III">3</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XX">20</a>), and Alcuin calls him <span class="tei tei-q">“vir sine fraude bonus.”</span> He retired from York
          when Wilfrid was restored, but appears to have been reinstated on
          Wilfrid's second expulsion.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_602" id="note_602" class="pginternal">602.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Abbot of Melrose, afterwards of
          Lindisfarne (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXVI">III,
          26</a>, and note; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXVII">IV, 27</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_IX">V, 9</a>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_603" id="note_603" class="pginternal">603.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXVIII">III, 28</a>, and this Chapter, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          fin.</span></span>, and note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_604" id="note_604" class="pginternal">604.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">In 675. Lindsey which had been
          Northumbrian under Edwin and Oswald, had passed through many
          vicissitudes. Penda conquered it, Oswy recovered it (in 655),
          Wulfhere conquered it again, Egfrid recovered it (675). It passed
          finally to Mercia under Ethelred in 679 (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.
          infra</span></span> this Chapter, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          fin.</span></span>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_605" id="note_605" class="pginternal">605.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">III, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XI">11</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXVII">27</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_606" id="note_606" class="pginternal">606.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">He was still Bishop of Lindsey in 706,
          when he signed a charter of Ethelward, <span class="tei tei-q">“subregulus”</span> of the Hwiccas.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_607" id="note_607" class="pginternal">607.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Preface, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg004">4</a>, and <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIII">V, 23</a>. Simeon of Durham says that he died in
          732.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_608" id="note_608" class="pginternal">608.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Lindsey was at that time subject to
          Mercia. Sexwulf was expelled when Egfrid conquered it in 675. When
          the Mercian diocese was subdivided, he retained his see at
          Lichfield (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span> c. 3, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg219">219</a>, note) as Bishop of the Mercians
          proper.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_609" id="note_609" class="pginternal">609.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">By Theodore alone. The suffragans did
          not take part in the consecration.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_610" id="note_610" class="pginternal">610.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">In 681 a fresh subdivision took place.
          The Bernician diocese was divided, Eata retaining Lindisfarne and
          giving up Hexham to Tunbert. Afterwards Eata retired from
          Lindisfarne in favour of Cuthbert and took Hexham (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.
          infra</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXVIII">28</a>). Tunbert had been Abbot of Gilling (In
          Getlingum, III, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XIV">14</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXIV">24</a>). He was deposed by Theodore from Hexham three
          years after his consecration (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v. infra</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXVIII">28</a>), like Wynfrid,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“pro culpa cujusdam inobedientiae”</span>
          (Vita Eatae in <span class="tei tei-q">“Miscellanea
          Biographica,”</span> Surtees Society).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_611" id="note_611" class="pginternal">611.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">His see was not at Whitern among the
          Picts of Galloway, as has been supposed (Florence of Worcester,
          Richard of Hexham, and others), but at the monastery of Abercorn on
          the Forth (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XII">I,
          12</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXVI">IV,
          26</a>), the Picts north of the Forth being at this time subject to
          Northumbria. After Egfrid's disastrous expedition in 685, they
          freed themselves from Northumbrian rule, the see was abandoned, and
          Trumwine retired to Whitby (c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXVI">26</a>). We hear of him as one of the deputation to
          Cuthbert in 684 (c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXVIII">28</a>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_612" id="note_612" class="pginternal">612.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">In 679; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span>,
          p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg243">243</a>, note 5.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_613" id="note_613" class="pginternal">613.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Whether Ripon became for a time an
          episcopal see seems doubtful. In <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXVIII">III, 28</a>, Bede says distinctly that Eadhaed
          became <span class="tei tei-q">“praesul”</span> of the church
          there, and it does not seem consistent with his use to understand
          it as = abbot. Probably there was an attempt to subdivide the
          diocese of Deira (Eddius mentions it as one of Wilfrid's
          grievances), but the scheme was abandoned when Wilfrid was restored
          in 705. Ripon did not finally become an episcopal see till
          1836.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_614" id="note_614" class="pginternal">614.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">For a fuller account, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XIX">V, 19</a>, and
          notes.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_615" id="note_615" class="pginternal">615.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">For the early importance of this
          kingdom under Aelli, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_V">II, 5</a>. It had become a small insignificant
          nation, cut off from its neighbours by forests (the <span class="tei tei-q">“Andredsweald”</span>) and marshes, and though we read
          (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XX">III, 20</a>) that
          Damian, bishop of Rochester, was of the South Saxon race, it was
          almost untouched by Christian influences.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_616" id="note_616" class="pginternal">616.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">infra</span></span>
          c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XV">15</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_617" id="note_617" class="pginternal">617.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">He also brought about the reconversion
          of the East Saxons by sending Bishop Jaruman to them. Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXX">III, 30</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_618" id="note_618" class="pginternal">618.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Wulfhere had invaded Wessex, probably
          in 661 (Sax. Chron.), and conquered the Isle of Wight and the
          district of the Meanware, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">i.e.</span></span>, the district from
          Southampton Water to the South Downs. The inhabitants were Jutes.
          The name survives in the hundreds, Meonstoke, and East and West
          Meon. For the termination <span class="tei tei-q">“ware”</span> =
          dwellers, cf. Lindisfari, Cantuarii, Boructuari, etc.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_619" id="note_619" class="pginternal">619.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XIV">14</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_620" id="note_620" class="pginternal">620.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. II, 2, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg084">84</a>, note 2.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_621" id="note_621" class="pginternal">621.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">They were probably joint kings of the
          Hwiccas.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_622" id="note_622" class="pginternal">622.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-q">“Scottish,”</span> as usual, means Irish. There is
          another Dicul mentioned in <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XIX">III, 19</a>. Stevenson suggests the identification of
          this Dicul with the Irish monk who wrote a geographical work, the
          <span class="tei tei-q">“De Mensura Orbis Terrae,”</span> but he
          lived in the ninth century.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_623" id="note_623" class="pginternal">623.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Bosham, near Chichester. It was the
          favourite South Saxon abode of Harold and Godwine (Freeman,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Norman Conquest”</span>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_624" id="note_624" class="pginternal">624.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Selsey, the island of the seal
          (<span class="tei tei-q">“sea-calf”</span>), south of Chichester.
          It was a royal <span class="tei tei-q">“vill.”</span> It became the
          episcopal see for the South Saxons at some time about 709 (cf.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XVIII">V, 18</a>,
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          fin.</span></span> and note), transferred to Chichester in
          1075.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_625" id="note_625" class="pginternal">625.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Egfrid fell at the battle of
          Nechtansmere in 685 (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXVI">26</a>), and Wilfrid was
          restored to his bishopric <span class="tei tei-q">“in the second
          year of Aldfrid,”</span> Egfrid's successor (V, 19, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg353">353</a>). He was in Wessex with
          Caedwalla for part of the year 686 (cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XVI">16</a>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_626" id="note_626" class="pginternal">626.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XIII">III, 13</a>, note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_627" id="note_627" class="pginternal">627.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">C. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XIII">13</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_628" id="note_628" class="pginternal">628.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This English equivalent for
          <span class="tei tei-q">“viaticum”</span> is used by Stapleton in
          his translation (1565).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_629" id="note_629" class="pginternal">629.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Calendars to show the proper days for
          commemorative Masses, cf. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">infra</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“chronicle”</span> (<span class="tei tei-q">“annale”</span>). The burial was generally on the day
          of death, hence <span class="tei tei-q">“depositio”</span> of the
          festival of a saint.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_630" id="note_630" class="pginternal">630.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">It must be remembered that this was a
          monastery of Northumbrians. But Oswald is said to have held an
          <span class="tei tei-q">“imperium”</span> over all England except
          Kent (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_V">II,
          5</a>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_631" id="note_631" class="pginternal">631.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">C. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XII">12</a>, note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_632" id="note_632" class="pginternal">632.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The West Saxons, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_V">II, 5</a> and note.
          Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_VII">III,
          7</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_633" id="note_633" class="pginternal">633.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">C. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XIII">13</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_634" id="note_634" class="pginternal">634.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_VII">V, 7</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad fin.</span></span> Like Caedwalla, a
          descendant of Ceaulin, <span class="tei tei-q">“A king who deserves
          the name of great”</span> (Bright), great both as a conqueror and a
          legislator. He was probably the first king to introduce written law
          into Wessex, viz., his famous <span class="tei tei-q">“Dooms,”</span> enacted by a West Saxon witenagemot in
          the early years of his reign.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_635" id="note_635" class="pginternal">635.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Winchester. At this time Haedde was
          bishop there (c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XII">12</a>). For the creation of a South Saxon bishopric
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XIII">V, 18</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad fin.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_636" id="note_636" class="pginternal">636.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Eddius says that Caedwalla sent for
          him and made him his counsellor; Wilfrid had befriended him when in
          exile.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_637" id="note_637" class="pginternal">637.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Roger of Wendover calls him a
          <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">subregulus</span></span>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_638" id="note_638" class="pginternal">638.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XV">I, 15</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_639" id="note_639" class="pginternal">639.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Stoneham on the Itchen, near
          Southampton. For the preposition, cf. II, 14, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg119">119</a>, note 5.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_640" id="note_640" class="pginternal">640.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Redbridge in Hampshire.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_641" id="note_641" class="pginternal">641.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pref., p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg003">3</a> and note; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XVIII">V, 18</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_642" id="note_642" class="pginternal">642.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The Solent.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_643" id="note_643" class="pginternal">643.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The Hamble.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_644" id="note_644" class="pginternal">644.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Eutyches was Archimandrite of a
          monastery near Constantinople. He was condemned by the synod of
          Constantinople in 448, and by the council of Chalcedon in 451. He
          was the originator of the Monophysite heresy which denied the
          existence of the two natures, the Divine and human, in the
          Incarnate Son. Monothelitism, which was the subject of the
          controversy alluded to here, arose out of an attempt to reconcile
          the Monophysites by the assertion of one will and operation
          (activity, ἐνέργεια) in our Lord. It was condemned in the General
          Council of Constantinople, 680-681. In anticipation of this council
          various provincial synods were held, as well as the synod at Rome
          assembled by Pope Agatho, at which Wilfrid represented the English
          church (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XIX">V. 19</a>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_645" id="note_645" class="pginternal">645.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The year was 680 (cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIV">V, 24</a>), but it falls in
          the eighth year of Hlothere of Kent, who succeeded in July, 673.
          For Egfrid, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_V">5</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          init.</span></span> Probably he succeeded in 671. Ethelred of
          Mercia succeeded in 675 (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIV">V, 24</a>), so that Sept., 680, might easily fall in
          his sixth year; Aldwulf, of East Anglia, in 663 or 664
          (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XV">II, 15</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXIII">IV, 23</a>). The eighth indiction, whether
          Cæsarean or Pontifical (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_V">5</a>, note), includes Sept.
          17, 680.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_646" id="note_646" class="pginternal">646.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Generally identified with Hatfield in
          Hertfordshire, but T. Kerslake (<span class="tei tei-q">“Vestiges
          of the supremacy of Mercia”</span>) supposes it to be Clovesho
          (Cliff-at-Hoe); <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_V">5</a>, and note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_647" id="note_647" class="pginternal">647.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The five Oecumenical Councils which
          had been held before this time, viz., Nicaea, in 325;
          Constantinople, in 381-382; Ephesus, in 431; Chalcedon, in 451;
          Constantinople, in 553. For the Arian heresy, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_VIII">I, 8</a> (and
          note), where <span class="tei tei-q">“madness”</span> (<span class="tei tei-q">“vesania”</span>) is, as here, the word used to
          describe it. Macedonius was a <span class="tei tei-q">“semi-Arian,”</span> Eudoxius an Arian; both were
          bishops of Constantinople. Nestorius was consecrated Bishop of
          Constantinople in 428. He popularized the heresy which originated
          with Theodore, Bishop of Mopsuestia, 392-428. It consisted in
          emphasizing the human element in our Lord's Nature to the practical
          exclusion of the Divine, as a reaction against Apollinarianism
          which explained away His real Humanity. <span class="tei tei-q">“The Christ of Nestorius was, after all, simply a
          deified man, not God incarnate”</span> (Gore, <span class="tei tei-q">“Bampton Lectures”</span>). Theodoret, Bishop of Cyrus
          in Syria (died 457) and Ibas, Bishop of Edessa, 435-457, were
          disciples of Theodore, Bishop of Mopsuestia, and opponents of Cyril
          of Alexandria, who is accused of Apollinarianism in the letter of
          Ibas.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_648" id="note_648" class="pginternal">648.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Justinian I, 527-565.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_649" id="note_649" class="pginternal">649.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The first Lateran Council, in 649,
          against the Monothelites. Martin I, Pope 649-655, died in the
          Crimea, exiled and imprisoned by the Emperor Constans II in
          consequence of his resistance to the heresy.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_650" id="note_650" class="pginternal">650.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Constantine IV, more generally known
          as Constans II, 641-688.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_651" id="note_651" class="pginternal">651.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">We have here, under the auspices of an
          Eastern Archbishop, a clear enunciation of the doctrine which
          afterwards divided the east and west: the Double Procession of the
          Holy Spirit. The <span class="tei tei-q">“filioque”</span> clause,
          which formed no part of the Nicene Creed, nor of its
          Constantinopolitan recension, had been formally adopted at the
          Third Council of Toledo in 589 and at subsequent Spanish councils.
          The English prelates at Hatfield were probably influenced by this
          precedent.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_652" id="note_652" class="pginternal">652.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. Bede's <span class="tei tei-q">“History of the Abbots,”</span> § 6.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_653" id="note_653" class="pginternal">653.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span>, St. Peter's at Rome. The
          Monastery of St. Martin was on the Esquiline. It was founded by
          Pope Symmachus in honour of SS. Sylvester and Martin.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_654" id="note_654" class="pginternal">654.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_I">1</a>, notes. (For his life, v. Bede's
          <span class="tei tei-q">“History of the Abbots,”</span> and the
          Anon. <span class="tei tei-q">“History of the Abbots.”</span>) He
          has not been mentioned before in this history. His ecclesiastical
          surname was Benedict, <span class="tei tei-q">“Baducing”</span> was
          probably his patronymic. He was of noble birth and a thegn of King
          Oswy, born in 628. He was the companion of Wilfrid on his first
          journey to Rome (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XIX">V,
          19</a>). In his native province of Northumbria he founded the
          monasteries of Wearmouth (in 674) and Jarrow (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">circ.</span></span>
          681), where Bede's life was passed, and enriched them with
          furniture, vestments, relics, pictures, and a library of valuable
          books which he brought from the Continent. The rule which he framed
          for his monasteries was Benedictine, compiled from seventeen
          different monasteries which he had visited. He died Jan. 12,
          689.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_655" id="note_655" class="pginternal">655.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXI">V, 21</a>. Bede's <span class="tei tei-q">“History of
          the Abbots,”</span> and Anon. <span class="tei tei-q">“History of
          the Abbots.”</span> He added to Benedict's library. He had been a
          monk at Ripon under Wilfrid, became Abbot of Jarrow in 681, and of
          Wearmouth in addition to Jarrow in 688. In 716 he resigned and set
          out for Rome, but died at Langres in the same year. Bede was
          trained under him (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIV">V, 24</a>) and was probably the little boy left alone
          with him to recite the offices when the pestilence of 686 swept
          away the monks. (Anon. Hist. Abb. § 14.)</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_656" id="note_656" class="pginternal">656.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XX">II, 20</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad fin.</span></span>, note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_657" id="note_657" class="pginternal">657.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XVII">17</a>, and note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_658" id="note_658" class="pginternal">658.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">In the Council of Constantinople,
          680-681 (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XVII">17</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          init.</span></span>, note.)</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_659" id="note_659" class="pginternal">659.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">To St. Martin's own church at Tours,
          where, as Abbot of St. Martin's monastery at Rome, it was specially
          fitting that he should find burial.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_660" id="note_660" class="pginternal">660.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_VII">III, 7</a>, note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_661" id="note_661" class="pginternal">661.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-q">“Princeps,”</span> A.S. Ealdorman. The county of the
          Southern Gyrwas was South Cambridgeshire. Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XX">III, 20</a>, note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_662" id="note_662" class="pginternal">662.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXV">25</a>. Bede tells us in the <span class="tei tei-q">“Life of Cuthbert,”</span> that she was a half sister
          of Oswy's on the mother's side. Her name survives in Ebchester on
          the Derwent, where she founded a nunnery; in St. Abb's Head, near
          which she afterwards founded the double monastery of Coldingham;
          and in St. Ebbe's, Oxford. She was the friend of Cuthbert, and it
          was to her exhortations to Egfrid that Wilfrid owed his release
          from prison.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_663" id="note_663" class="pginternal">663.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Coldingham in Berwickshire. It was a
          mixed monastery. Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXV">25</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_664" id="note_664" class="pginternal">664.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ely. The Isle of Ely was her jointure
          from her first husband. She received the help and support of
          Aldwulf, king of East Anglia (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XV">II, 15</a>; IV, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XVII">17</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXIII">23</a>), her cousin (he was the son of Ethelhere and
          nephew of Anna). The monastery was founded in 673. It was exempted
          from the jurisdiction of the East Anglian bishop, and subject to
          Wilfrid.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_665" id="note_665" class="pginternal">665.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_VIII">III, 8</a>, cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_VII">III, 7</a>, note. After her husband's death she acted
          as regent for a time, then founded a monastery in the Isle of
          Sheppey, and became abbess of it. Thence she retired to Ely, where,
          after being a simple nun, she succeeded Ethelthryth as abbess. She
          was herself succeeded first at Sheppey, and afterwards at Ely, by
          her daughter Ermingild, widow of Wulfhere of Mercia.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_666" id="note_666" class="pginternal">666.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Grantchester, near Cambridge.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_667" id="note_667" class="pginternal">667.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A Roman sarcophagus. A number of
          fragments of very ancient stone coffins have been found there,
          built into the wall of the church (Mayor and Lumby).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_668" id="note_668" class="pginternal">668.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-q">“Audrey”</span> is the popular form of the name
          Ethelthryth. A <span class="tei tei-q">“tawdry lace”</span>
          (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">i.e.</span></span> St. Audrey lace) is a
          necklace; cf. <span class="tei tei-q">“Winter's Tale,”</span> iv.
          3. Hence our word <span class="tei tei-q">“tawdry,”</span> which
          possibly only derives its meaning from the cheap necklaces, etc.,
          sold at St. Audrey's fair at Ely on the saint's day, October 17
          (the day of her translation), but may also be a reminiscence of
          this anecdote.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_669" id="note_669" class="pginternal">669.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The poem is (1) alphabetical;
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">i.e.</span></span>, the first letters of the
          hexameter lines form the alphabet, and there are four additional
          couplets at the end, in which the first letters form the word
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Amen”</span>; (2) <span class="tei tei-q">“serpentine,”</span> reciprocal or echoing;
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">i.e.</span></span>, the last half of the
          pentameter repeats the first two and a half feet of the hexameter.
          Such verses are common in mediaeval Latin, and are doubtless a
          development from the occasional instances of echoing lines which
          occur in the classical poets (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">e.g.</span></span>, Martial VIII, xxi, 1-2;
          IX, 97; Ovid, Fasti IV, 365-366), as the extreme form of that
          impulse to give emphasis by iteration which is a marked feature of
          Latin poetry, particularly of the Ovidian elegiac.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_670" id="note_670" class="pginternal">670.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Agatha suffered 5th February, 251
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>, in the Decian
          persecution, according to her <span class="tei tei-q">“Acta”</span>
          (the Diocletian, according to the Martyrology and Aldhelm). Eulalia
          was burnt to death at the age of twelve in the Diocletian
          persecution, having denounced herself. The legend tells that a
          white dove hovered over her ashes till snow fell and covered them.
          Tecla, the disciple of St. Paul, is said to have been the first
          virgin martyr. She was miraculously saved from her martyrdom and
          died in peace long after. Euphemia was torn by wild beasts at
          Chalcedon in 307 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span> in the Diocletian
          persecution. Asterius, Bishop of Amasea, 400 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>, says that he saw a
          tablet in the church at Chalcedon depicting her sufferings. We have
          thus very early evidence for her history. Agnes is said to have
          been beheaded in 304 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>, in the Diocletian
          persecution, at the age of twelve or thirteen. The date of St.
          Cecilia is very uncertain; Fortunatus, Bishop of Poitiers, says
          that she died <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">circ.</span></span> 176-180 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>, but another account
          places her martyrdom as late as the time of Diocletian. Her
          connection with music does not appear in the legends, and is
          probably due to the fact that Pope Paschal endowed the monastery
          which he built in connection with her church at Rome to provide for
          musical services at her tomb day and night.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_671" id="note_671" class="pginternal">671.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">She had not been a queen twelve years.
          The dates are probably these: she was born about 630 at Ermynge
          (Ixning) in Suffolk, and married to Tondbert in 652. Tondbert died
          in 655, and she was married to Egfrid (who must then have been only
          fifteen) in 660. Egfrid succeeded to the throne in 670 or 671, and
          it must have been in 672 that she retired to Coldingham. She was,
          therefore, queen for not more than two years, though perhaps we may
          accept the statement of the Liber Eliensis that Egfrid was sub-king
          of Deira for some years before his accession.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_672" id="note_672" class="pginternal">672.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span>, she had been buried
          sixteen years; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XIX">19</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_673" id="note_673" class="pginternal">673.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Literally the water snake, ὕδρος, used
          generally for any serpent, and so = the Devil; <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Chelydrus</span></span> is similarly used
          (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> Ducange).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_674" id="note_674" class="pginternal">674.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The Battle of the Trent in 679 (cf.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIV">V, 24</a>). It was
          on the anniversary of Wilfrid's expulsion; he is said to have
          foretold a calamity. The place may, perhaps, be identified with
          Elford-on-Trent, in Staffordshire; it is supposed that the name may
          be a reminiscence of Aelfwine. By this battle Mercia regained
          Lindsey, which never again became Northumbrian (cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XII">12</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          fin.</span></span>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_675" id="note_675" class="pginternal">675.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXII">22</a>, where he is called <span class="tei tei-q">“King Aelfwine,”</span> as also twice in Eddius. He may
          have been sub-king of Deira.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_676" id="note_676" class="pginternal">676.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XI">III, 11</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIV">V, 24</a>. When Wilfrid took refuge in Mercia in 681,
          she and her husband expelled him <span class="tei tei-q">“pro
          adulatione Egfridi regis”</span> (Eddius).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_677" id="note_677" class="pginternal">677.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The <span class="tei tei-q">“Wergild,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">i.e.</span></span>, pecuniary value set upon
          every man's life according to his status (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
          Stubbs, <span class="tei tei-q">“Constitutional
          History”</span>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_678" id="note_678" class="pginternal">678.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-q">“Comes,”</span> A.S. <span class="tei tei-q">“gesith.”</span> Above, Imma is described as
          <span class="tei tei-q">“de militia ejus juvenis,”</span>
<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">i.e.</span></span>, a young <span class="tei tei-q">“king's thegn”</span> (the term applied to him in the
          A.S. version).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_679" id="note_679" class="pginternal">679.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Towcester (<span class="tei tei-q">“Tovecester,”</span> in Domesday Book) in
          Northamptonshire, Doncaster, and Littleborough have all been
          suggested, but the place has not been identified. The name
          indicates that it had been a Roman station.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_680" id="note_680" class="pginternal">680.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Sexburg. Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_VIII">III, 8</a>; IV, 19, p.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg261">261</a>, and note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_681" id="note_681" class="pginternal">681.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. III, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXIV">24</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXV">25</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXIV">IV, 24</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIV">V, 24</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_682" id="note_682" class="pginternal">682.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ibid.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_683" id="note_683" class="pginternal">683.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">infra</span></span>,
          this Chapter. He was the son of Edwin's elder brother, who died in
          exile after the invasion of Deira by Ethelric, king of Bernicia, in
          589.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_684" id="note_684" class="pginternal">684.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_IX">II, 9</a>, foll.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_685" id="note_685" class="pginternal">685.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Her sister, Heresuid, had married
          Ethelhere, brother of Anna, of East Anglia, whom he succeeded. In
          647, when Hilda took the veil, Anna was still king.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_686" id="note_686" class="pginternal">686.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_VIII">III, 8</a>, note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_687" id="note_687" class="pginternal">687.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XV">II, 15</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XVII">IV, 17</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_688" id="note_688" class="pginternal">688.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A small cell, not otherwise
          known.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_689" id="note_689" class="pginternal">689.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Hartlepool, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> III,
          24, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg190">190</a>, note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_690" id="note_690" class="pginternal">690.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Bede is the sole authority for her
          life. A fifteenth century gloss on one of the MSS. has led to her
          being wrongly identified with the Irish Bega, the supposed
          foundress of St. Bees.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_691" id="note_691" class="pginternal">691.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A Roman station on the Wharfe, now
          Tadcaster. Probably the nunnery was at Healaugh (Heiu's
          <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">laeg</span></span> = territory), three miles
          north of Calcaria. A gravestone bearing Heiu's name has been found
          there.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_692" id="note_692" class="pginternal">692.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XII">12</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_693" id="note_693" class="pginternal">693.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">His name does not appear in any of the
          lists of bishops. There is no evidence that a see of Dorchester
          (cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_VII">III, 7</a>,
          and note) existed at this time, except from this passage and the
          statement of Florence of Worcester to the effect that a fivefold
          division of the Mercian diocese took place in 679, that Dorchester
          was included in Mercia, and that Aetla was appointed as its bishop.
          Probably this latter statement is derived from Bede. It has been
          proposed to identify Aetla with Haedde, Bishop of the West Saxons
          (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_VII">III, 7</a>;
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XII">IV, 12</a>;
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XVIII">V, 18</a>), but it
          seems unlikely that Bede should not have mentioned their identity.
          The most probable explanation seems to be that a see was
          established about 679 at Dorchester (which may have been under
          Mercia at the time) and that Aetla was its bishop, but that it had
          only a very short existence.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_694" id="note_694" class="pginternal">694.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">infra</span></span>,
          notes.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_695" id="note_695" class="pginternal">695.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">John of Beverley, <span class="tei tei-q">“Inderauuda”</span> (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_II">V, 2</a>). He and
          Berthun (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ibid.</span></span>) are said to have founded
          Beverley. He was consecrated Bishop of Hexham, probably in 687,
          transferred to York 705, when Wilfrid was restored to Hexham, and
          died in 721, soon after his retirement to Beverley (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_VI">V, 6</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          fin.</span></span>). As Bishop of Hexham he ordained Bede both
          deacon and priest (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIV">V. 24</a>). He had been a pupil of Archbishop
          Theodore (cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_III">V.
          3</a>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_696" id="note_696" class="pginternal">696.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Wilfrid II, Bishop of York. He
          succeeded John (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_VI">V,
          6</a>) in 718, and was still Bishop of York in 731 when Bede
          finished the History (cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIII">V, 23</a>). In 732 he resigned and was succeeded by
          Egbert (to whom Bede addressed the Ep. ad Egb., and who in 735
          received the pallium as Archbishop of York). Wilfrid died in 745
          (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Continuation">Continuation</a>, 732, 735, and 745). His
          character is highly praised by Alcuin (De Sanct. Ebor.).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_697" id="note_697" class="pginternal">697.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Hartlepool and Whitby, both apparently
          double monasteries.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_698" id="note_698" class="pginternal">698.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. II, 2, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg084">84</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_699" id="note_699" class="pginternal">699.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Dr. Stubbs suggests that this sub-king
          of the Hwiccas may possibly be the same as Osric of Northumbria,
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIII">V, 23</a>, and note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_700" id="note_700" class="pginternal">700.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The see was at Worcester. The
          foundation of the bishopric is assigned by Florence of Worcester to
          the year 679, the date of the alleged fivefold division of the
          Mercian diocese (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span> p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg272">272</a>, note 2), Bosel being appointed bishop.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_701" id="note_701" class="pginternal">701.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XII">12</a> and note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_702" id="note_702" class="pginternal">702.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The consecration of Oftfor is
          generally placed in 691. It was after Wilfrid's second expulsion,
          when he was acting as Bishop of Leicester. Theodore had died in
          690, and Bertwald was not consecrated till 693 (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_VIII">V, 8</a>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_703" id="note_703" class="pginternal">703.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">So Florence of Worcester.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_704" id="note_704" class="pginternal">704.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">He was king of the Britons of Loidis
          and Elmet. It was probably to avenge the death of his nephew,
          Hereric, that Edwin conquered Loidis and drove out Cerdic.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_705" id="note_705" class="pginternal">705.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XIV">14</a>, note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_706" id="note_706" class="pginternal">706.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Hackness, thirteen miles from Whitby
          and three to the west of Scarborough. It was a cell belonging to
          Whitby. At the dissolution under Henry VIII, it contained only four
          monks, of the Benedictine order (Dugdale, <span class="tei tei-q">“Monasticon”</span>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_707" id="note_707" class="pginternal">707.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">She has been confused with Heiu and
          with Bega, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span> p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg271">271</a>, note 7.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_708" id="note_708" class="pginternal">708.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span>, the Prioress.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_709" id="note_709" class="pginternal">709.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Obviously ballads, probably of a
          warlike character, existed before Caedmon, but he is regarded as
          the father of English sacred poetry. It is a question how far the
          new impulse arose independently among the Anglo-Saxons, or is to be
          connected with Old Saxon religious poetry of which the <span class="tei tei-q">“Heliand”</span> is the only extant specimen (cf.
          Plummer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad loc.</span></span>). Of the mass of poetry
          attributed to Caedmon, much must be regarded as not his actual
          work. The fragment translated here by Bede has been accepted as
          genuine by most critics. It exists in the Northumbrian dialect at
          the end of the Moore MS. of Bede, and in a West Saxon form in other
          MSS., as well as in the Anglo-Saxon translation of Bede's History,
          the Northumbrian version being the oldest.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_710" id="note_710" class="pginternal">710.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-q">“Villicus,”</span> A.S. <span class="tei tei-q">“tun-gerefa”</span> = town-reeve, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">i.e.</span></span>,
          headman of the township. Cædmon was apparently a herdsman on a farm
          belonging to the monastery.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_711" id="note_711" class="pginternal">711.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. Levit., xi, 3, and Deut., xiv,
          6.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_712" id="note_712" class="pginternal">712.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Apparently reserved and kept in the
          Infirmary for the Communion of the dying.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_713" id="note_713" class="pginternal">713.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Matins were sung soon after
          midnight.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_714" id="note_714" class="pginternal">714.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Coldingham, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span> c.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XIX">19</a> and
          note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_715" id="note_715" class="pginternal">715.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Not the Abbot of Iona who wrote the
          the life of St. Columba (V, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XV">15</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXI">21</a>). This Adamnan is found in the Martyrology of
          Wilson, in Colgan's <span class="tei tei-q">“Lives of the Irish
          Saints,”</span> and in Bollandus, <span class="tei tei-q">“Acta
          Sanctorum.”</span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_716" id="note_716" class="pginternal">716.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">From the Vulgate, Ps. xciv, 2. (xcv in
          our Psalter.)</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_717" id="note_717" class="pginternal">717.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">C. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XIX">19</a> and note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_718" id="note_718" class="pginternal">718.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The detached dwellings built round the
          principal buildings of the community. Irish monasteries were built
          after this fashion.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_719" id="note_719" class="pginternal">719.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Wearmouth and Jarrow.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_720" id="note_720" class="pginternal">720.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">For Berct, cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIV">V, 24</a> (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sub</span></span>
          698), note. The circumstances which led to the invasion are not
          known.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_721" id="note_721" class="pginternal">721.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The Picts north of the Forth, cf. c.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XII">12</a>,
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          fin.</span></span> Their king at this time was Bruide mac Bili, who
          was Egfrid's distant kinsman. In 672 Egfrid had crushed a rising of
          Picts under the same king.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_722" id="note_722" class="pginternal">722.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. cc. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXVII">27-32</a>. He had a mysterious intimation of
          the disaster at the hour of the king's defeat and death, and warned
          the queen (Eormenburg), who was with him at Carlisle (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
          Bede's Life of Cuthbert, and the Anonymous Life). He is also said
          to have prophesied the king's death a year before to Elfled,
          Egfrid's sister (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXIV">III, 24</a>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_723" id="note_723" class="pginternal">723.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">At Nechtansmere or Dunnechtan,
          identified with Dunnichen, near Forfar. Egfrid was buried in Iona,
          where Adamnan, the friend of his successor, was Abbot.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_724" id="note_724" class="pginternal">724.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_V">5</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad init.</span></span>, note. If he succeeded
          in February, 670, this would be his sixteenth year.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_725" id="note_725" class="pginternal">725.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">III, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_IV">4</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXVII">27</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_III">IV, 3</a>; V, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_IX">9</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_X">10</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XX">22</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIV">24</a>. His English birth and long residence in
          Ireland fitted him to be a mediator.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_726" id="note_726" class="pginternal">726.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Vergil, Aen. II, 169.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_727" id="note_727" class="pginternal">727.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The Dalriadic Scots (Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_I">I, 1</a>, note; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XXXIV">I, 34</a>) and the Britons
          of Strathclyde.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_728" id="note_728" class="pginternal">728.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XII">12</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_729" id="note_729" class="pginternal">729.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Abercorn on the Forth, cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XII">I, 12</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XII">IV, 12</a>, and note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_730" id="note_730" class="pginternal">730.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">III, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXIV">24</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXV">25</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXIII">IV, 23</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIV">V, 24</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_731" id="note_731" class="pginternal">731.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. III, 24, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg190">190</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_732" id="note_732" class="pginternal">732.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXIV">III, 24</a>, and note. Elfled succeeded Hilda as
          abbess, and apparently ruled jointly with her mother.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_733" id="note_733" class="pginternal">733.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V">V</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">passim</span></span>, and Bede's two lives of
          Cuthbert. His mother's name is said by the Irish authorities to
          have been Fina. He had lived among the Irish islands (<span class="tei tei-q">“in insulis Scottorum,”</span> and <span class="tei tei-q">“in regionibus Scottorum”</span>) for the sake of
          study, according to Bede, but William of Malmesbury implies that
          Egfrid may have been responsible for his exile. He was a man of
          great learning and of scholarly tastes. In Bede's <span class="tei tei-q">“History of the Abbots,”</span> we are told that he
          gave eight hides of land for a MS. which Benedict Biscop had
          brought from Rome.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_734" id="note_734" class="pginternal">734.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cc. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_V">5</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XVII">17</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXII">22</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_735" id="note_735" class="pginternal">735.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cc. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_I">1</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_V">5</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_736" id="note_736" class="pginternal">736.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Apparently at one time joint-king with
          Hlothere. Certain dooms are ascribed to them both. According to
          Thomas of Elmham, he was killed in war against Caedwalla, king of
          Wessex, and his brother, Mul, who were at this time encroaching on
          Kent.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_737" id="note_737" class="pginternal">737.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Mul seems to have usurped the throne
          for a time.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_738" id="note_738" class="pginternal">738.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">In 692 we find him reigning as
          joint-king with Swaebhard (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_VIII">V, 8</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad fin.</span></span>). He must have succeeded
          in 690, if Bede's dates are correct; cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIII">V, 23</a>, where it is
          said that he died on April 23, 725, after a reign of thirty-four
          and a half years.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_739" id="note_739" class="pginternal">739.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span>, 685.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_740" id="note_740" class="pginternal">740.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">C. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXVI">26</a> and note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_741" id="note_741" class="pginternal">741.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XVI">III, 16</a> and note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_742" id="note_742" class="pginternal">742.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">As a boy he had been remarkable for
          his high spirits and love of athletic exercises. The rebuke of a
          little boy of three is said to have turned his thoughts to a more
          serious life, and a vision which he saw as he watched his sheep on
          the Lammermuir Hills on the night of Aidan's death, led him to form
          the resolve of entering a monastery. (Bede's Life of
          Cuthbert.)</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_743" id="note_743" class="pginternal">743.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Melrose; cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXVI">III, 26</a> and
          note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_744" id="note_744" class="pginternal">744.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ibid.</span></span> and <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_IX">V, 9</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_745" id="note_745" class="pginternal">745.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">C. 12, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg243">243</a>, note 1.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_746" id="note_746" class="pginternal">746.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">C. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXVIII">28</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_IX">V, 9</a>. Probably here <span class="tei tei-q">“sacerdos”</span> = priest, A.S. version: <span class="tei tei-q">“masse-preost.”</span> But Aelfric calls him bishop.
          The town of St. Boswells on the Tweed is called after him. For an
          instance of his prophetic spirit, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.
          infra</span></span>, c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXVIII">28</a>. It was his fame which drew Cuthbert to
          Melrose. When he saw the youth on his arrival, he exclaimed,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Behold a servant of the Lord!”</span> He
          is generally supposed to have been carried off by the plague of
          664. For an account of his last days spent in reading the Gospel of
          St. John with Cuthbert, v. Bede's Prose Life of Cuthbert. The
          <span class="tei tei-q">“codex”</span> which they used was extant
          in Durham in Simeon of Durham's time.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_747" id="note_747" class="pginternal">747.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. III, 3, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg139">139</a>, note 3.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_748" id="note_748" class="pginternal">748.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XXVII">I, 27</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad init.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_749" id="note_749" class="pginternal">749.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Much of the account given here is from
          the prose life.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_750" id="note_750" class="pginternal">750.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The synod of Twyford, a mixed assembly
          of clergy and laity, met in the autumn of 684. The place is
          <span class="tei tei-q">“perhaps where the Aln is crossed by two
          fords near Whittingham”</span> (in Northumberland) (Bright). This
          is another instance of the preposition prefixed to the name, cf.
          II, 14, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg119">119</a>, note
          5.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_751" id="note_751" class="pginternal">751.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cc. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XII">12</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXVI">26</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_752" id="note_752" class="pginternal">752.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. 27, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg288">288</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_753" id="note_753" class="pginternal">753.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">In 685.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_754" id="note_754" class="pginternal">754.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XII">12</a> and note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_755" id="note_755" class="pginternal">755.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ibid.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_756" id="note_756" class="pginternal">756.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Soon after Christmas, 686. In
          February, 687, his last illness began.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_757" id="note_757" class="pginternal">757.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">St. Herbert's Island in Derwentwater.
          Strictly speaking, the Derwent flows through Derwentwater: it rises
          in Borrowdale. An indulgence of forty days was granted by Thomas
          Appleby, Bishop of Carlisle, in 1374 to pilgrims who visited the
          island.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_758" id="note_758" class="pginternal">758.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Carlisle, called also Luel by Simeon
          of Durham.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_759" id="note_759" class="pginternal">759.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">In 687.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_760" id="note_760" class="pginternal">760.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">In St. Peter's Church. In 875, when
          the monks fled from Lindisfarne before the Danes, his relics were
          removed, first to Chester-le-Street, then to Ripon, and eventually
          to Durham. Simeon of Durham says the body was found to be
          uncorrupted, when it was placed in the new Cathedral there in
          1104.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_761" id="note_761" class="pginternal">761.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The year in which he administered the
          bishopric falls between his restoration to York, Hexham, and the
          monastery of Ripon, and his second expulsion.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_762" id="note_762" class="pginternal">762.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXV">III, 25</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          init.</span></span>, and <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">infra</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXX">30</a>. In the life of
          Cuthbert he is described as a man <span class="tei tei-q">“magnarum
          virtutum”</span> (miraculous powers?). Alcuin tells that he calmed
          the winds by his prayers.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_763" id="note_763" class="pginternal">763.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">698 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_764" id="note_764" class="pginternal">764.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The Dacre, a small stream near
          Penrith. There are the ruins of a castle, and Smith says there is a
          tradition of a monastery on its banks.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_765" id="note_765" class="pginternal">765.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Not the missionary in <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XI">V, 11</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_766" id="note_766" class="pginternal">766.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-q">“Innumera
          miracula”</span> are ascribed to him by Florence of Worcester.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_767" id="note_767" class="pginternal">767.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XVI">III, 16</a>, and note; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXVII">IV, 27-30</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_768" id="note_768" class="pginternal">768.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ripon, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> III,
          25, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg194">194</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XIX">V, 19</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_769" id="note_769" class="pginternal">769.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cuthbert and Eadbert (IV, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXIX">29</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXX">30</a>). His relics were
          removed with Cuthbert's and finally interred at Durham.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_770" id="note_770" class="pginternal">770.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXVI">IV, 26</a>, and <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XVIII">V, 18</a>. He reigned from 685 to 705.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_771" id="note_771" class="pginternal">771.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXVI">III, 26</a>; IV, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XII">12</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXVII">27</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXVIII">28</a>. He died in 686.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_772" id="note_772" class="pginternal">772.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">John of Beverley, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> IV,
          23, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg273">273</a>, and note.
          Wilfrid administered the bishopric during the vacancy between
          Eata's death and John's consecration in 687.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_773" id="note_773" class="pginternal">773.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ibid.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_774" id="note_774" class="pginternal">774.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Beverley. The present name is said to
          be derived from a colony of beavers in the Hull river. In 866 the
          minster was destroyed by the Danes, but it was repaired three years
          later. In 925 Athelstan restored it and made it collegiate, giving
          it lands and various privileges. (For the preposition, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> II,
          14, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg119">119</a>, note 5.)</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_775" id="note_775" class="pginternal">775.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Supposed to have been at St. John's
          Lee, near Hexham. The old name is Erneshow or Herneshaw. (Richard
          of Hexham, Folcard.)</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_776" id="note_776" class="pginternal">776.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The reading of the best MSS.,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Clymeterium”</span> (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v. ll.</span></span>
          clymiterium, climiterium, clymitorium) seems inexplicable. Smith
          reads <span class="tei tei-q">“coemeterium,”</span> probably on the
          authority of a gloss (<span class="tei tei-q">“id est
          cimeterium”</span>) on some of the later MSS., and it has generally
          been translated <span class="tei tei-q">“cemetery.”</span> The AS.
          version has <span class="tei tei-q">“gebæd hus 7 ciricean”</span> =
          oratory and church.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_777" id="note_777" class="pginternal">777.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Acts, iii, 2-8.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_778" id="note_778" class="pginternal">778.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This was Wilfrid's second restoration.
          He recovered Hexham and the monastery of Ripon at the Synod on the
          Nidd in 705.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_779" id="note_779" class="pginternal">779.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Bosa (IV, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XII">12</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXIII">23</a>) died <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">circ.</span></span> 705.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_780" id="note_780" class="pginternal">780.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Watton in the East Riding of
          Yorkshire. (<span class="tei tei-q">“Hodie Watton, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">i.e.</span></span>,
          humida villa ex aquis et paludibus quibus septa est.”</span>
          Smith.) It is called Betendune by Folcard, the biographer of Bishop
          John.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_781" id="note_781" class="pginternal">781.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">For <span class="tei tei-q">“studium”</span> = medical treatment, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
          Plummer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad loc.</span></span> Under the verb,
          <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">studere</span></span>, Ducange gives instances
          of this meaning: <span class="tei tei-q">“Iussitque rex, ut
          studeretur a medicis”</span>; Greg. Turon., vi, 32. <span class="tei tei-q">“Episcopus, adhibito mulomedico, jussit ei (equo)
          studium impendere, quo scilicet sanari potuisset”</span>; St.
          Audoënus, lib. 2; Vit. St. Eligii, 44.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_782" id="note_782" class="pginternal">782.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Bishop John had studied under
          Theodore. Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXIII">IV,
          23</a>, note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_783" id="note_783" class="pginternal">783.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Note the tendency to hereditary
          succession in monasteries (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> Haddan and Stubbs, III,
          337-338). Instances are, however, rare in England, though common in
          Ireland, where the clan system affected ecclesiastical preferments.
          Eanfled and Elfled at Whitby are not a case in point, as Eanfled
          did not precede her daughter, but was only associated with her in
          some way in the government of the monastery.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_784" id="note_784" class="pginternal">784.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This <span class="tei tei-q">“vill”</span> was at South Burton (Folcard), now called
          Bishop Burton, between two and three miles from Beverley.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_785" id="note_785" class="pginternal">785.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">To redeem his fast, as the A.S.
          version explains.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_786" id="note_786" class="pginternal">786.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">St. Matt., viii, 14-15; St. Mark, i,
          30-31; St. Luke, iv, 38-39.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_787" id="note_787" class="pginternal">787.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">At North Burton (Dugdale, <span class="tei tei-q">“Monasticon”</span>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_788" id="note_788" class="pginternal">788.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">He lived till 745, according to Simeon
          of Durham.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_789" id="note_789" class="pginternal">789.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">There were probably two monasteries at
          Tynemouth, the one mentioned here, and another (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
          Bede's <span class="tei tei-q">“Life of Cuthbert”</span>), which
          had been a house of monks, but afterwards, when Bede wrote, had
          become a nunnery.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_790" id="note_790" class="pginternal">790.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Breathing on the face and catechizing
          were practised in order to exorcise evil spirits from the hearts of
          catechumens (Bede, Opp. viii, 106).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_791" id="note_791" class="pginternal">791.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The Saxon Chronicle is very exact:
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Thirty-three years, eight months, and
          thirteen days.”</span> This would date his episcopate from August,
          687, to May, 721, for May 7th was observed as the day of his
          festival at Beverley.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_792" id="note_792" class="pginternal">792.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_II">2</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_793" id="note_793" class="pginternal">793.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Wilfrid II: <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> IV,
          23, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg273">273</a>, and note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_794" id="note_794" class="pginternal">794.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span>, in 688. For Caedwalla,
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> IV, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XII">12</a> (and note), <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XV">15</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XVI">16</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_795" id="note_795" class="pginternal">795.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Sergius I, 687-701.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_796" id="note_796" class="pginternal">796.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. II, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_IX">9</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XIV">14</a> and notes.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_797" id="note_797" class="pginternal">797.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XIV">II, 14</a> and note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_798" id="note_798" class="pginternal">798.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">By Benedictus Crispus, Archbishop of
          Milan. He died in 725.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_799" id="note_799" class="pginternal">799.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span>, Sergius was his godfather
          (cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_VII">III, 7</a>,
          where Oswald stands sponsor for Cynegils). The Saxon Chronicle says
          he also baptized him.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_800" id="note_800" class="pginternal">800.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Justinian II. He succeeded in 685 and
          died in 711.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_801" id="note_801" class="pginternal">801.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XV">IV, 15</a>, and note. Thus, according to Bede's
          reckoning, he reigned from 688 to 725, but the date of his
          abdication is variously given.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_802" id="note_802" class="pginternal">802.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Gregory II., 715-731, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
          Preface, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg002">2</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_803" id="note_803" class="pginternal">803.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">He was consecrated 26th March, 668,
          and died, as Bede says here, on 19th September, 690.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_804" id="note_804" class="pginternal">804.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The church of SS. Peter and Paul. Cf.
          II, 3, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg090">90</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_805" id="note_805" class="pginternal">805.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">They are elegiacs. Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_X">I, 10</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_806" id="note_806" class="pginternal">806.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_III">II, 3</a>, and <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">infra</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XIX">19</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIII">23</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_807" id="note_807" class="pginternal">807.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The old Roman town Reculver, in Kent.
          A charter of 679 exists (the oldest original English charter
          extant) by which King Hlothere of Kent grants land in Thanet to
          Bertwald and his monastery.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_808" id="note_808" class="pginternal">808.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Said to be the Inlade.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_809" id="note_809" class="pginternal">809.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The see was, therefore, vacant for two
          years, possibly owing to the political troubles of the time, cf.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXVI">IV, 26</a>,
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          fin.</span></span> The further delay of a year between Bertwald's
          election and consecration may have been caused by his desire to
          obtain greater weight as consecrated by the Primate of a
          neighbouring Church (Haddan and Stubbs, III, 229).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_810" id="note_810" class="pginternal">810.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">For Wictred, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXVI">IV, 26</a>, and
          note. Thomas of Elmham tries to identify Suaebhard with Suefred,
          son of Sebbi, king of the East Saxons (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XI">IV, 11</a>,
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          fin.</span></span>), and says that he made himself king of Kent by
          violence, but this seems very improbable.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_811" id="note_811" class="pginternal">811.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">He was Archbishop of Lyons. The Church
          of Lyons did not obtain the primacy over other metropolitan
          churches till the eleventh century, but apparently it held a
          leading position even before this time.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_812" id="note_812" class="pginternal">812.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">He was trained under Theodore and
          Hadrian in the School of Canterbury; cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIII">V, 23</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          init.</span></span> The date of Gebmund's death and the succession
          of Tobias cannot be earlier than 696, as Gebmund (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XII">IV, 12</a>) appears
          to have been present at the Kentish Witenagemot of Bersted in that
          year. (Haddan and Stubbs, III, 238, 241.) Tobias died in 726.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_813" id="note_813" class="pginternal">813.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">III, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_IV">4</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXVII">27</a>; IV, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_III">3</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXVI">26</a>, and <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">infra</span></span> cc. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_X">10</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XX">22</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIII">23</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIV">24</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_814" id="note_814" class="pginternal">814.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The name does not occur in any Celtic
          literature which we possess. All the evidence seems to show that
          the Celts have always called the English <span class="tei tei-q">“Saxons.”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Ellmyn,”</span> for Allemanni, occurs sometimes in
          Welsh poetry (Rhŷs, <span class="tei tei-q">“Celtic
          Britain”</span>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_815" id="note_815" class="pginternal">815.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The Frisians at this time occupied the
          coastland from the Maas to the region beyond the Ems. The Rugini
          are probably the Rugii (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> Tacitus, Germania, Chapter
          XLIII). They were on the shores of the Baltic, probably about the
          mouth of the Oder (the name survives in Rügen and Rügenwalde). They
          are found with other North German tribes in the army of Attila, and
          afterwards formed a settlement on the Lower Danube. The Danes were
          mainly in Jutland, Fünen, and the extreme south of Scandinavia. The
          Huns, who appeared in Europe towards the end of the fourth century
          and menaced both the Eastern and Western Empires, were, after
          Attila's death, driven eastwards, and settled near the Pontus,
          disappearing among the Bulgarians and other kindred tribes. The Old
          Saxons, or Saxons of the Continent (cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XV">I, 15</a>), occupied both sides of the Elbe.
          The name Saxon does not occur in the oldest accounts of the
          Germans. Probably it was a new name for a union of nations which
          comprised the Cherusci, Chauci, Angrivarii (and perhaps other
          tribes) of Tacitus. The Boructuari are the Bructeri in Westphalia
          (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> Zeuss, <span class="tei tei-q">“Die Deutschen und die Nachbarstämme”</span>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_816" id="note_816" class="pginternal">816.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXVII">IV, 27</a> (note) and <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXVIII">28</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_817" id="note_817" class="pginternal">817.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Melrose; cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXVI">III, 26</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXVII">IV, 27</a>, and
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">infra</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XII">12</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_818" id="note_818" class="pginternal">818.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXVII">IV, 27</a>. Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXVI">III, 26</a>; IV, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XII">12</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXVIII">28</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_II">V, 2</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_819" id="note_819" class="pginternal">819.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. III, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_III">3</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_IV">4</a>, and notes; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">i.e.</span></span>,
          the monasteries which owed their origin to Columba and were
          included in the <span class="tei tei-q">“province”</span> of Iona.
          They are distinguished from those which are mentioned in c.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XV">15</a> as
          <span class="tei tei-q">“ab Hiensium dominio liberi.”</span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_820" id="note_820" class="pginternal">820.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">His baptismal name was Colum
          (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">columba</span></span> = a dove). He is said to
          have acquired the name of Colum-cille, because in his youth he was
          so constantly in the <span class="tei tei-q">“cell”</span> or
          oratory.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_821" id="note_821" class="pginternal">821.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Jonah, i, 12.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_822" id="note_822" class="pginternal">822.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Nothing more is known of him. Alcuin
          mentions him in his life of Wilbrord. His name is included in a
          list of the eleven companions of Wilbrord given in a life of St.
          Suidbert (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v. infra</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XI">11</a>), but no value is to
          be attached to it (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> Haddan and Stubbs, III, 225).
          Bede distinctly says that he retired from missionary efforts after
          this unsuccessful attempt.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_823" id="note_823" class="pginternal">823.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The story is told that at one time
          Rathbed was about to receive baptism at the hands of St. Wulfram,
          Archbishop of Sens, but drew back on being told that his ancestors
          were among the lost, refusing to go to Heaven without them. His
          perpetual wars with the Franks ended in his defeat and expulsion,
          and he died in 719.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_824" id="note_824" class="pginternal">824.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The authority for Wilbrord's life is
          Alcuin, who wrote it both in prose and verse. Wilbrord was born in
          657 or 658 in Northumbria, and was handed over by his mother to the
          monks at Ripon in his infancy. His father, Wilgils, became a hermit
          on a promontory at the mouth of the Humber. At the age of twenty he
          went to Ireland for the sake of study and a stricter life. In 690
          he set out for Frisland with eleven others, landed at Katwyk and
          went to Utrecht, which was afterwards his episcopal see
          (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.
          infra</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XI">11</a>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_825" id="note_825" class="pginternal">825.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">They turned aside to Pippin on finding
          Rathbed obdurate. Pippin of Heristal, Mayor of the Palace of the
          Austrasian kings, had defeated the Neustrians at Testry in 687 and
          was now the actual ruler of the Franks, though it was his grandson,
          Pippin the Short, who first assumed royal power.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_826" id="note_826" class="pginternal">826.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. 9, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg319">319</a>, and note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_827" id="note_827" class="pginternal">827.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Roger of Wendover places their mission
          in 695. It must have been later than Wilbrord's in 690.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_828" id="note_828" class="pginternal">828.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-q">“Satrap,”</span> cf. Stubbs, Constitutional History, i,
          pp. 41-42. From this passage and similar notices of the Continental
          Saxons he infers that they had remained free from Roman influences
          and from any foreign intermixture of blood or institutions.
          <span class="tei tei-q">“They had preserved the ancient features of
          German life in their purest forms.... King Alfred, when he
          translated Bede had no difficulty in recognizing in the satrap the
          ealdorman, in the villicus the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">tungerefa</span></span>, in the vicus the
          <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">tunscipe</span></span> of his own
          land.”</span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_829" id="note_829" class="pginternal">829.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The year cannot be fixed.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_830" id="note_830" class="pginternal">830.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The Church of St. Cunibert, Cologne
          (Gallican Martyrology, quoted by Smith).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_831" id="note_831" class="pginternal">831.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Sergius I: <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span> c.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_VII">7</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_832" id="note_832" class="pginternal">832.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Alcuin tells how he killed some of the
          sacred cattle of the god Fosite, a son of Balder, in Heligoland,
          and baptized three men in his well.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_833" id="note_833" class="pginternal">833.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A life of him by Marcellinus
          (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_IX">9</a>, note on Wictbert) is
          worthless historically. Besides what we learn from Bede, we have
          the date of his death (713) given by the <span class="tei tei-q">“Annales Francorum.”</span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_834" id="note_834" class="pginternal">834.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This was after Wilfrid's second
          expulsion (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XIX">V,
          19</a>). Bertwald was elected in July, 692, and returned from the
          Continent in August, 693 (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_VIII">8</a>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_835" id="note_835" class="pginternal">835.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The usual form of the name is
          Plectrude.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_836" id="note_836" class="pginternal">836.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Kaiserwerth on the Rhine, where it is
          believed that his relics still remain in a silver shrine in the
          thirteenth-century church. (For the preposition, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> II,
          14, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg119">119</a>, note 5.)</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_837" id="note_837" class="pginternal">837.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This was Santa Cecilia in Trastevere.
          The festival is 22nd November. As to the year, Mr. Plummer
          considers that an entry in an old calendar belonging to Epternach,
          near Trèves, Wilbrord's own monastery, giving the date 695, is
          almost certainly by Wilbrord himself.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_838" id="note_838" class="pginternal">838.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Utrecht. A distinction has been drawn
          between the two places, Wiltaburg, or Wiltenburg, being a village
          near Utrecht, but the names appear to be interchangeable.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_839" id="note_839" class="pginternal">839.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The Church of St. Saviour. He also
          rebuilt a small church which had been destroyed by the pagans, and
          consecrated it in honour of St. Martin (Letter of St. Boniface to
          Pope Stephen). The cathedral stands on the site of this
          church.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_840" id="note_840" class="pginternal">840.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Bede writes in 731. As Alcuin says
          Wilbrord lived to be eighty-one years of age, he must have died in
          738 or 739. Boniface is fairly accurate when he says that he
          preached for fifty years.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_841" id="note_841" class="pginternal">841.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Mr. Skene (<span class="tei tei-q">“Celtic Scotland,”</span> i., p. 219) has shown that
          the place cannot be Cunningham in Ayrshire, which was not in
          Northumbria, but in Strathclyde, and not at that time subject to
          Northumbria. He suggests Tininghame in East Lothian, which Simeon
          of Durham calls Intiningaham, and places in the diocese of
          Lindisfarne (C being a scribe's error for T). Chester-le-Street
          (Saxon: Cunungaceaster) has also been suggested.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_842" id="note_842" class="pginternal">842.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Melrose, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXVI">III, 26</a>;
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXVII">IV, 27</a>;
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_IX">V, 9</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_843" id="note_843" class="pginternal">843.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XIX">III, 19</a>. On mediaeval visions, cf. Plummer,
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          loc.</span></span>, and Bright, p. 144.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_844" id="note_844" class="pginternal">844.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Vergil, Aen. VI, 268.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_845" id="note_845" class="pginternal">845.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXVI">IV, 26</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_I">V. 1</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_846" id="note_846" class="pginternal">846.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIII">23</a>. He began life in the service of St.
          Cuthbert. He became first Prior, or Provost, then Abbot of Melrose,
          and succeeded Eadfrid, who died in 721, as Bishop of Lindisfarne.
          He enriched Lindisfarne with two treasures of art: a beautiful
          stone cross which he erected there, and a cover of gold and jewels
          for the Lindisfarne Gospels, written by Eadfrid in honour of St.
          Cuthbert. The book is now in the British Museum, but the cover is
          lost.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_847" id="note_847" class="pginternal">847.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">704-709. Cf. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">infra</span></span>,
          c. 19, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg345">345</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg356">356</a>, and c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIV">24</a>. He was the son of
          Wulfhere, but being a boy at the time of his father's death, was
          passed over in favour of Ethelred, Wulfhere's brother.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_848" id="note_848" class="pginternal">848.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ps. xxxi, 1, in the Vulgate (xxxii in
          our Psalter).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_849" id="note_849" class="pginternal">849.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Bishop of Whitern; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.
          infra</span></span>, cc. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XVIII">18</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIII">23</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_850" id="note_850" class="pginternal">850.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. 1 John, v, 16.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_851" id="note_851" class="pginternal">851.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Acts, vii, 56.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_852" id="note_852" class="pginternal">852.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The northern Irish, and of them only
          those who were independent of Iona (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.
          infra</span></span>). The southern Irish had conformed much
          earlier; cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_III">III,
          3</a>, and note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_853" id="note_853" class="pginternal">853.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">It is not clear whether Bede means
          that any Britons were converted by Adamnan. If so, they must have
          been Britons of Strathclyde. The Welsh only conformed 755-777. The
          reference may be to those of the Cornish Britons, subject to the
          West Saxons, who were led in 705 by Aldhelm's letter to Geraint to
          adopt the Catholic Easter (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v. infra</span></span>, c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XVIII">18</a>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_854" id="note_854" class="pginternal">854.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ninth Abbot of Iona, 679-704, the
          author of the Life of St. Columba.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_855" id="note_855" class="pginternal">855.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Of Northumbria. Aldfrid, who had
          studied in Iona during his exile, was his friend. Adamnan visited
          the king twice, first, circ. 686, when he obtained the release of
          the sixty Irish prisoners taken to England by Berct in 684
          (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXVI">IV, 26</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          init.</span></span>) and again two years later (cf. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">infra</span></span>
          c. 21, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg372">372</a>, note
          2).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_856" id="note_856" class="pginternal">856.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The Irish annals mention two voyages
          to Ireland subsequent to that in 686 with the prisoners, viz., in
          692 and 697, after which he probably stayed there till after
          Easter, 704.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_857" id="note_857" class="pginternal">857.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">On 23rd September, 704. (The dates are
          those of Tighernach and the <span class="tei tei-q">“Annales
          Cambriae.”</span>)</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_858" id="note_858" class="pginternal">858.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Adamnan's <span class="tei tei-q">“De
          Locis Sanctis,”</span> and Bede's account here, are the only
          sources of information with regard to this bishop. Adamnan's book
          is based on the narrative of Arculf compared with other
          authorities. Bede, again, in his own work on the the same subject,
          made selections from Adamnan, using also other authorities,
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">e.g.</span></span> Josephus.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_859" id="note_859" class="pginternal">859.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span>, he had copies made of
          it.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_860" id="note_860" class="pginternal">860.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Nevertheless he quotes his own book
          rather than Adamnan's.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_861" id="note_861" class="pginternal">861.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. Warren and Conder, <span class="tei tei-q">“Survey of Western Palestine”</span>: <span class="tei tei-q">“Bethlehem, a well-built stone town, standing on a
          narrow ridge which runs east and west ... towards the east is the
          open market place, and, beyond this, the convent in which is the
          fourth century church of St. Mary, including the Grotto of the
          Nativity beneath the main apse.”</span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_862" id="note_862" class="pginternal">862.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-q">“Vulturnus”</span> seems to be distinguished from its
          Greek equivalent, <span class="tei tei-q">“Eurus.”</span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_863" id="note_863" class="pginternal">863.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The Basilica of the Anastasis was
          completed by Constantine in 335 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>, and destroyed in 614
          by Chosroes II, King of Persia. Other ancient travellers besides
          Arculf describe the Holy Places. Eucherius, writing about 427-440,
          mentions the Martyrium, Golgotha and the Anastasis, and describes
          their respective sites in similar terms. Theodorus (about 530
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>) alludes to the
          Invention of the Holy Cross by Helena, but the earliest authorities
          do not connect her with it.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_864" id="note_864" class="pginternal">864.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-q">“Brucosa.”</span> The adjective is not found in the
          dictionaries. But Ducange has the following words from which one
          may, perhaps, infer an adjective of kindred meaning: <span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Brua</span></span>, idem quod supra
          <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Brossa</span></span>, silvula,
          dumetum,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Bruarium</span></span>, ericetum,”</span> and
          <span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Broca</span></span>, ager incultus,
          dumetum.”</span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_865" id="note_865" class="pginternal">865.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The Basilica of the Ascension, on the
          summit of Mount Olivet, is mentioned by the Pilgrim of Bordeaux who
          was in Jerusalem in 333 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span> No traces of the
          church have been found. He also speaks of the Anastasis, which was
          being built at the time.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_866" id="note_866" class="pginternal">866.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Saewulf (1102 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>) writes: <span class="tei tei-q">“Below is the place called Golgotha, where Adam is said
          to have been raised to life by the Blood of our Lord which fell
          upon him, as is said in the Passion, <span class="tei tei-q">‘And
          many bodies of the saints which slept arose.’</span> But in the
          sentences of St. Augustine we read that he was buried in Hebron,
          where also the three patriarchs were afterwards buried with their
          wives, Abraham with Sarah, Isaac with Rebecca, and Jacob with Leah,
          as well as the bones of Joseph which the children of Israel carried
          with them from Egypt.”</span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_867" id="note_867" class="pginternal">867.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">He died at Driffield (supposed to mean
          the <span class="tei tei-q">“field of Deira”</span>), in the East
          Riding of Yorkshire, on 14th December, 705 (Saxon Chronicle).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_868" id="note_868" class="pginternal">868.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Bede and the Chronicle do not mention
          the usurper Eadwulf, who held the sovereignty for eight weeks. With
          Aldfrid the greatness of Northumbria, which had begun to decline
          after Egfrid's defeat and death, passed away, except for a brief
          revival in the time of Eadbert and his brother, Archbishop Egbert.
          Osred was a tyrannical and lawless boy, and a period of political
          and ecclesiastical trouble set in (cf. Bede, <span class="tei tei-q">“Epistola ad Egbertum”</span>; Boniface, Ep. 62,
          etc.).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_869" id="note_869" class="pginternal">869.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_VII">III, 7</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XII">IV, 12</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_870" id="note_870" class="pginternal">870.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Infra</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIII">23</a>. He has been
          mentioned, c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XIII">13</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad fin.</span></span> He studied under Aldhelm
          at Malmesbury (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v. infra</span></span>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_871" id="note_871" class="pginternal">871.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The greatest scholar of his time and
          the man of widest influence as a teacher. He was a West Saxon, of
          royal blood, born about 639; he studied first under Hadrian in the
          School of Canterbury, then under Maildufus (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.
          infra</span></span>), was ordained priest by Bishop Hlothere
          (Leutherius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_VII">III, 7</a>), and about the year 675 became
          Abbot of Malmesbury, which under his rule grew to be a place of
          importance and attracted crowds of students. On one occasion he
          went by invitation of Pope Sergius to Rome. He became Bishop of
          Sherborne, when in 705 the West Saxon diocese was divided
          (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.
          infra</span></span>). He died in 709 in the little church of
          Doulting in Somerset and was buried in St. Michael's Church at
          Malmesbury. He greatly strengthened the Church in Wessex by his
          influence with King Ini and his zeal in building churches and
          monasteries in various places. His widespread influence, as well as
          his generous use of it, is shown by his letter to Wilfrid's clergy
          after the Council of Estrefeld, exhorting them to remain faithful
          to their bishop (v. Haddan and Stubbs, III, 254).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_872" id="note_872" class="pginternal">872.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">In 705. The bishopric of the West
          Saxons was the only one which Theodore did not subdivide. The delay
          may have been due to the political disturbances of the time, and
          these had come to an end under the rule of Ini. Haedde's death
          removed a further difficulty. He seems to have resisted Bertwald's
          attempt to divide the diocese, for we find in 704 a council
          threatening the West Saxons with excommunication if the division is
          not carried out. Hampshire, Surrey, and, for a time, Sussex, were
          assigned to Winchester; Berkshire, Wiltshire, Dorsetshire, and
          Somersetshire to Sherborne (Haddan and Stubbs, III, 276), but the
          authorities differ on this point. After the Conquest, the combined
          bishoprics of Sherborne and Ramsbury (founded in 909 for Wiltshire)
          had their see established at Old Sarum.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_873" id="note_873" class="pginternal">873.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. Preface, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg003">3</a>, and note, and <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XVI">IV, 16</a>. In 744 he
          resigned his see and died in 745. It appears from a letter of
          Boniface to him that he became blind in his old age.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_874" id="note_874" class="pginternal">874.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Malmesbury. It was founded by an Irish
          monk and scholar, Maildufus (Irish <span class="tei tei-q">“Maelduib”</span>), as a small settlement living under
          monastic rule (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span> note on Aldhelm).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_875" id="note_875" class="pginternal">875.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">His letter to Geraint or Gerontius,
          king of Dumnonia (Devon and Cornwall). A West Saxon synod in 705
          appointed Aldhelm to write a book, <span class="tei tei-q">“quo
          maligna haeresis Britonum destrueretur”</span> (Faricius, Life of
          Aldhelm). He appears to have influenced only those Britons who were
          subject to the West Saxons. Devon and Cornwall did not finally
          conform to the Catholic Easter till early in the tenth
          century.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_876" id="note_876" class="pginternal">876.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_X">IV, 10</a> (note on Hildilid).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_877" id="note_877" class="pginternal">877.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A poet of the fifth century (circ.
          450), author of a poem called <span class="tei tei-q">“Carmen
          Paschale.”</span> He translated it into prose and called it
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Opus Paschale.”</span> Aldhelm wrote his
          prose work first.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_878" id="note_878" class="pginternal">878.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">His style is turgid and grandiloquent,
          and, owing to the high estimation in which he was held, his
          influence in this respect on contemporary writing was harmful.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_879" id="note_879" class="pginternal">879.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">infra</span></span>
          c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIII">23</a>. A
          letter to him from Archbishop Bertwald is extant. We do not know
          how long he lived. We have his signature to a charter of 739.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_880" id="note_880" class="pginternal">880.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XV">IV, 15</a>. The see was established at Selsey. The
          date of this event is not known (Matthew of Westminster is the only
          authority for 711). Bede indicates it very vaguely (<span class="tei tei-q">“quibus administrantibus”</span>), and does not make it
          clear to whose administration he alludes. The more obvious
          reference is surely to Daniel and Aldhelm, the passage about
          Forthere being parenthetical, but the other view has the authority
          of Haddan and Stubbs (III, 296), viz., that he means Daniel and
          Forthere, and that thus the date is fixed to some time after
          Aldhelm's death (709).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_881" id="note_881" class="pginternal">881.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Selsey, cf. IV, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XIII">13</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XIV">14</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_882" id="note_882" class="pginternal">882.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The vacancy was filled in 733 by the
          appointment of Sigfrid (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Continuation">Continuation</a>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_883" id="note_883" class="pginternal">883.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XVIII">18</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad init.</span></span> His fourth year was
          709.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_884" id="note_884" class="pginternal">884.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">C. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XIII">13</a> and <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">infra</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XIX">19</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          fin.</span></span>, and c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIV">24</a>. For a similar action, cf. Caedwalla and Ini
          (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_VII">7</a>) and (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">infra</span></span>)
          Offa.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_885" id="note_885" class="pginternal">885.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Constantine I, 708-715.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_886" id="note_886" class="pginternal">886.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">709-716. St. Boniface (Letter to
          Ethelbald) gives Ceolred a very bad character, and says that he
          died impenitent at a banquet, seized with sudden madness. He
          alludes to him and Osred of Northumbria as the first kings who
          tampered with the privileges of the Church.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_887" id="note_887" class="pginternal">887.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXX">III, 30</a>, and <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_VI">IV, 6</a>. Sighere reigned jointly with Sebbi. They
          were succeeded by Sebbi's sons, Sighard and Swefred (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XI">IV, 11</a>). Offa probably
          succeeded them just before this time (709); William of Malmesbury
          says he reigned for a short time. He was succeeded by Selred (d.
          746).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_888" id="note_888" class="pginternal">888.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">St. Matt., xix, 29; St. Mark, x, 30;
          St. Luke, xviii, 30.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_889" id="note_889" class="pginternal">889.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Oundle in Northamptonshire, where he
          had a monastery on land given him by Wulfhere of Mercia. For the
          form of the name, cf. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">infra</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“in provincia Undalum.”</span> Here the preposition is
          prefixed as often; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XIV">II, 14</a>, note. Wilfrid died on a Thursday in
          October: there is some uncertainty about the day of the month.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_890" id="note_890" class="pginternal">890.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. the epitaph (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">infra</span></span>)
          and c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIV">24</a>,
          where Bede places his consecration in 664. This is supported by
          William of Malmesbury, but Eddius says he was bishop for forty-six
          years.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_891" id="note_891" class="pginternal">891.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ripon, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.
          infra</span></span>, p. 56. In the tenth century, Odo, Archbishop
          of Canterbury, removed certain relics to Canterbury, believing them
          to be the body of Wilfrid. At Ripon it was maintained that the
          relics were those of Wilfrid II.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_892" id="note_892" class="pginternal">892.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Our main authority for the life of
          Wilfrid is Eddius (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_II">IV, 2</a>). Bede's account is remarkable for
          its omissions, though it gives a few facts which Eddius omits.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_893" id="note_893" class="pginternal">893.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">His birth must be placed in 634 (cf.
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">infra</span></span>, his consecration at the
          age of thirty). His father was a Northumbrian thegn. He is said to
          have had an unkind stepmother. He was sent by his father to the
          court of Oswy, thence, by Eanfled (cf. II, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_IX">9</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XX">20</a>; III, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XV">15</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXIV">24</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">et
          saep.</span></span>) to Lindisfarne, at that time under the rule of
          Aidan.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_894" id="note_894" class="pginternal">894.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_VIII">III, 8</a>. He was the son of Eadbald (II, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_V">5</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_VI">6</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_IX">9</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">et
          saep.</span></span>). Eanfled's mother was the sister of Eadbald,
          the Kentish princess Ethelberg (<span class="tei tei-q">“Tata”</span>), wife of Edwin (II, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_IX">9</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XI">11</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XX">20</a>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_895" id="note_895" class="pginternal">895.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XVIII">II, 18</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">et saep.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_896" id="note_896" class="pginternal">896.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XVIII">IV, 18</a>, and note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_897" id="note_897" class="pginternal">897.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXV">III, 25</a>. Annemundus was the name of the
          Archbishop. Dalfinus, Count of Lyons, was his brother. Eddius makes
          the same mistake.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_898" id="note_898" class="pginternal">898.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A daughter of the Count.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_899" id="note_899" class="pginternal">899.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">He presented Wilfrid to the Pope,
          Eugenius I. A leaden <span class="tei tei-q">“bulla”</span> with
          the name of Boniface, Archdeacon, inscribed upon it was found at
          Whitby not long ago.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_900" id="note_900" class="pginternal">900.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span>, to Annemundus.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_901" id="note_901" class="pginternal">901.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This seems to be another mistake in
          which Bede follows Eddius. It was probably Ebroin (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_I">IV, 1</a>, note),
          Mayor of the Palace to her infant son Clothaire III, who put
          Annemundus to death. Baldhild was, however, regent at the time.
          Eddius calls her a Jezebel, but all that we know of her shows her
          to have been a most pious and charitable lady, and she has been
          canonized by the Church. She was especially active in her efforts
          to stop the traffic in slaves. She herself, though she is said to
          have been of noble English birth, had been sold as a slave into
          Gaul. She was married first to Ercinwald, Mayor of the Palace, the
          predecessor of Ebroin (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XIX">III, 19</a>), and afterwards to Clovis II, King
          of Neustria and Burgundy, 638-656. Baldhild ended her life in the
          monastery of Chelles (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_VIII">III, 8</a>, and note).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_902" id="note_902" class="pginternal">902.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">III, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XIV">14</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXI">21</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XIV">24</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXV">25</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XVIII">28</a>. He was a friend of Coinwalch of Wessex, from
          whom, as Eddius says, he learned to love the Roman rules.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_903" id="note_903" class="pginternal">903.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Possibly Stamford, in Lincolnshire;
          more probably, since the land belonged to Alchfrid, Stamford
          Bridge, on the Derwent, in Yorkshire.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_904" id="note_904" class="pginternal">904.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXV">III, 25</a>, where the extent is given as forty
          families, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">i.e.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“hides.”</span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_905" id="note_905" class="pginternal">905.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. III, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_VII">7</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXV">25</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXVIII">28</a>; IV, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_I">1</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XII">12</a>. For the Gewissae, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_V">II, 5</a> and
          note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_906" id="note_906" class="pginternal">906.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">At the synod of Whitby, 664 (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXV">III, 25</a>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_907" id="note_907" class="pginternal">907.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Tuda (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXVI">III, 26</a>) had died of the plague of 664. For
          Wilfrid's consecration, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXVIII">III, 28</a>,
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          init.</span></span>, and note. Agilbert was not Bishop of Paris
          till 666 (cf. III, 25, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg194">194</a>, note).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_908" id="note_908" class="pginternal">908.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXVIII">III, 28</a>, and note. Wilfrid did not return
          to Britain till 666. Bede omits the story of his shipwreck on the
          coast of Sussex, and says nothing of the three years spent as Abbot
          of Ripon, whither he retired on finding Ceadda installed in his
          place. During this time he acted occasionally as Bishop for Mercia,
          where the see was vacant by the death of Jaruman in 667, and for
          Kent, during part of the vacancy between the death of Deusdedit in
          664 and Theodore's arrival in 669.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_909" id="note_909" class="pginternal">909.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The same Witan which elected Wilfrid
          decided to transfer the Northumbrian see from Lindisfarne back to
          York, where Paulinus had originally established it.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_910" id="note_910" class="pginternal">910.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">In 678, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XII">IV, 12</a>, and
          note. Bede passes over nine years of ceaseless activity in the
          diocese. It was during this time that Wilfrid built his great
          churches.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_911" id="note_911" class="pginternal">911.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Eddius says that he went there by his
          own wish. This is not the occasion referred to in <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XIII">III, 13</a> (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
          note, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          loc.</span></span>). Ebroin, from motives of private enmity
          (Wilfrid had helped his enemy, Dagobert II of Austrasia), attempted
          to bribe Aldgils to kill or surrender Wilfrid, but his offer was
          indignantly rejected.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_912" id="note_912" class="pginternal">912.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cc. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_X">10</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XI">11</a>; cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XIII">III, 13</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_913" id="note_913" class="pginternal">913.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">On the way he visited Dagobert II of
          Austrasia, and Perctarit, king of the Lombards.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_914" id="note_914" class="pginternal">914.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">At a council of fifty bishops held in
          the Lateran in 679. Theodore had sent documents stating his side of
          the case in charge of a monk named Coenwald. For Agatho,
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XVIII">IV, 18</a>. The decision was that Wilfrid
          should be reinstated in his bishopric and the intruding bishops
          removed, but that afterwards he should appoint coadjutors who
          should be consecrated by the Archbishop.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_915" id="note_915" class="pginternal">915.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This council was held in 680 in
          preparation for the Council at Constantinople in 680-681, against
          the Monothelites (cf. IV, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XVII">17</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XVIII">18</a>, and notes).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_916" id="note_916" class="pginternal">916.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">In 680. Here Bede strangely omits
          important events. On Wilfrid's return to Northumbria he was accused
          of having procured his acquittal by bribery and was imprisoned for
          nine months, first at Bromnis (unidentified) and then at Dunbar.
          Being released at the request of Aebba, Abbess of Coldingham
          (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> IV, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XIX">19</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXV">25</a>), who was Egfrid's
          aunt, he went first to Mercia and then to Wessex, but was expelled
          from both provinces. Egfrid's sister Osthryth was the wife of
          Ethelred of Mercia, and in Wessex the king, Centwine, had married a
          sister of the Northumbrian queen, Eormenburg.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_917" id="note_917" class="pginternal">917.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XIII">IV, 13</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_918" id="note_918" class="pginternal">918.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">IV, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XIII">13</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XVI">16</a>. His connection with Caedwalla of Wessex is to
          be placed here (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XVI">IV,
          16</a>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_919" id="note_919" class="pginternal">919.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">In 686 he was restored to the
          bishopric of York and the monastery of Ripon. The diocese over
          which he was now placed was greatly circumscribed. Lindsey and
          Abercorn, besides having been detached by the subdivision, had both
          ceased to belong to Northumbria; Lindisfarne and Hexham were
          separate bishoprics and were merely administered by Wilfrid till
          the appointment of Eadbert to Lindisfarne and of John to Hexham.
          The restoration of Wilfrid was brought about by Theodore who had
          become reconciled to him and induced Aldfrid to allow him to be
          reinstated.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_920" id="note_920" class="pginternal">920.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This was his second expulsion, in 691.
          Dissensions had arisen about various matters. The most important
          were the attempt, resisted by Wilfrid, to form Ripon into a
          separate see, and the requirement that he should accept the decrees
          of Theodore of 678. To accept these would have been equivalent to a
          rejection of the Pope's judgement in his case.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_921" id="note_921" class="pginternal">921.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Bede omits here Wilfrid's second
          sojourn in Mercia (eleven years), when he acted temporarily as
          Bishop of the Middle English (he alludes to it in <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXIII">IV, 23</a>), and the
          great Council, representative of the whole English Church, summoned
          by Aldfrid in 702 and held at a place in Northumbria (unidentified;
          possibly Austerfield in the West Riding of Yorkshire) called by
          Eddius <span class="tei tei-q">“Ouestraefelda”</span> and
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Aetswinapathe”</span> (supposed to mean
          <span class="tei tei-q">“at the swine's path,”</span> or
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Edwinspath”</span>). At this Council
          Wilfrid was excommunicated and deprived of all his possessions
          except the monastery of Ripon. He appealed again to the Apostolic
          see and returned to Mercia. Probably in the following year he set
          out for Rome, visiting Wilbrord in Frisia by the way (cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XIII">III, 13</a>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_922" id="note_922" class="pginternal">922.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">John VI, 701-705. Bertwald had sent
          envoys to represent Wilfrid's opponents. The investigation took
          four months, during which seventy sittings of the Council were
          held.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_923" id="note_923" class="pginternal">923.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Bertwald was admonished to hold a
          synod and come to an agreement with Wilfrid. In the event of
          failure, both parties were to appear in Rome. The letter is
          cautious and conciliatory in tone.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_924" id="note_924" class="pginternal">924.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">supra</span></span>,
          p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg352">352</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_925" id="note_925" class="pginternal">925.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">supra</span></span>,
          p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg349">349</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_926" id="note_926" class="pginternal">926.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Meaux, cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_I">IV, 1</a> (Meldi).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_927" id="note_927" class="pginternal">927.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XIII">III, 13</a>, and note; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">infra</span></span>
          c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XX">20</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_928" id="note_928" class="pginternal">928.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ethelred of Mercia had resigned his
          throne and was now Abbot of Bardney; cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XI">III, 11</a>, and IV, 12, p.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg241">241</a>, note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_929" id="note_929" class="pginternal">929.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cc. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XIII">13</a> and <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XIX">19</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad init.</span></span>; cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIV">24</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_930" id="note_930" class="pginternal">930.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XVIII">18</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad init.</span></span> He received his envoys
          courteously, but refused to alter his decision for any <span class="tei tei-q">“alleged writings from the Apostolic see.”</span> But
          Eddius says he repented on his deathbed.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_931" id="note_931" class="pginternal">931.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ibid.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_932" id="note_932" class="pginternal">932.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">In 705. It was a Northumbrian council,
          not, like Estrefeld, representative of the whole Church. Bertwald
          was present and adopted a conciliatory line.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_933" id="note_933" class="pginternal">933.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">He was restored only to Hexham and to
          his monastery at Ripon. Bishop John, on the death of Bosa about
          this time, was transferred to York; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span> c.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_III">3</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          init.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_934" id="note_934" class="pginternal">934.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Oundle, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span> p.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg346">346</a>, note 4.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_935" id="note_935" class="pginternal">935.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Or Cudwald. A Cuthbald succeeded
          Sexwulf (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_VI">IV, 6</a>)
          as Abbot at Medeshamstead. He is, perhaps, identical with the Abbot
          of Oundle.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_936" id="note_936" class="pginternal">936.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">supra</span></span>,
          p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg346">346</a>, and <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXV">III, 25</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_937" id="note_937" class="pginternal">937.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span> 710. But Hadrian left Rome
          in 668 (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_I">IV, 1</a>), and Bede says he died forty-one
          years after that event. This would be in 709.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_938" id="note_938" class="pginternal">938.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Preface">Preface</a> and <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_I">IV, 1</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_939" id="note_939" class="pginternal">939.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ibid.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_940" id="note_940" class="pginternal">940.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">St. Augustine's, Canterbury; cf.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_I">IV, 1</a>,
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          fin.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_941" id="note_941" class="pginternal">941.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Preface">Preface</a> and note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_942" id="note_942" class="pginternal">942.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XIII">III, 13</a>, and note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_943" id="note_943" class="pginternal">943.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A.S. version: Mafa. For the Roman
          style of Church music, cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XX">II, 20</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad fin.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_944" id="note_944" class="pginternal">944.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">IV, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XII">12</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXIII">23</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_III">V, 3</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_945" id="note_945" class="pginternal">945.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">In 710. Naiton, or Nechtan mac Derili,
          succeeded in 706. The northern Picts had received Christianity
          through Columba (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_IV">III, 4</a>). Naiton is said to have been converted to
          Roman usages by a missionary named Boniface, who was probably an
          Irishman, St. Cuiritin. Naiton did not succeed in forcing all his
          people to adopt them, but in 717 he expelled the Columban clergy
          who refused to conform.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_946" id="note_946" class="pginternal">946.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XVIII">IV, 18</a> and note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_947" id="note_947" class="pginternal">947.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Wearmouth (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ibid.</span></span>)
          and Jarrow, Bede's own monastery (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.
          infra</span></span>, c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIV">24</a>). Though they were some distance apart,
          Wearmouth and Jarrow formed together one monastery.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_948" id="note_948" class="pginternal">948.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XVIII">IV, 18</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_949" id="note_949" class="pginternal">949.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">II, 2, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg085">85</a>, note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_950" id="note_950" class="pginternal">950.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Wood being the usual material, cf.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_IV">III, 4</a>,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Candida Casa.”</span> The locality of the
          church is not known. Rosemarkie, on the Moray Frith, and, more
          probably, Restennet, near Forfar, have been suggested.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_951" id="note_951" class="pginternal">951.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The letter has been supposed to have
          been written by Bede himself.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_952" id="note_952" class="pginternal">952.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Plato, Rep. 473, D.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_953" id="note_953" class="pginternal">953.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Exod., xii, 1-3. (The quotations are
          from the Vulgate.)</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_954" id="note_954" class="pginternal">954.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Exod., xii, 6.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_955" id="note_955" class="pginternal">955.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ibid.</span></span>, xii, 15.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_956" id="note_956" class="pginternal">956.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Exod., xii, 15.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_957" id="note_957" class="pginternal">957.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ibid.</span></span>, xii, 17.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_958" id="note_958" class="pginternal">958.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Numbers, xxxiii, 13.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_959" id="note_959" class="pginternal">959.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Exod., xii, 17-19.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_960" id="note_960" class="pginternal">960.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">1 Cor., v, 7.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_961" id="note_961" class="pginternal">961.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">St. John, i, 29.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_962" id="note_962" class="pginternal">962.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Levit., xxiii, 5-7.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_963" id="note_963" class="pginternal">963.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. Bede's <span class="tei tei-q">“Expositio in Marci Evangelium”</span> (Opp. X, 2),
          where he says that St. Mark founded the Church in Alexandria, and
          taught the canonical observance of Easter; and Opp. VI, 235 (De
          Temp. Rat.).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_964" id="note_964" class="pginternal">964.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Levit., xxiii, 8.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_965" id="note_965" class="pginternal">965.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This was an error of the Latins in the
          fifth century. The object was to make it possible for Good Friday
          to fall on the fourteenth of the month Nisan, which they believed
          to be the actual day of the Crucifixion, and to keep Easter Day
          entirely clear of the Jewish festival.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_966" id="note_966" class="pginternal">966.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span> Alexandrians.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_967" id="note_967" class="pginternal">967.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Gen., i, 16.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_968" id="note_968" class="pginternal">968.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The Itala.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_969" id="note_969" class="pginternal">969.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Mal., iv, 2.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_970" id="note_970" class="pginternal">970.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Habak., iii, 11 (from the Itala).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_971" id="note_971" class="pginternal">971.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The Pelagians; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_X">I, 10</a>, and note; cf.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XVII">I, 17</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_972" id="note_972" class="pginternal">972.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The reference must be to p. 364,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“the apostolic tradition.”</span> For the
          nineteen years' cycle, cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_III">III, 3</a> (Anatolius).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_973" id="note_973" class="pginternal">973.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The celebrated Bishop of Caesarea,
          called also Eusebius Pamphili, a name which he adopted from
          devotion to his friend, Pamphilus. How much he had to do with the
          nineteen years' cycle seems altogether uncertain. He took a leading
          part in the Council of Nicaea (325 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>), but there is no
          proof that the Council formally adopted the cycle, as has been
          supposed. It had been in use long before, but it may have received
          authoritative sanction at Nicaea. Eusebius wrote a treatise on
          Easter, of which a fragment is extant.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_974" id="note_974" class="pginternal">974.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A presbyter of Caesarea, the founder
          of the famous library in that place. He was martyred in 309
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span> Eusebius wrote his
          life, but the work is lost.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_975" id="note_975" class="pginternal">975.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Archbishop of Alexandria, 385-412. He
          made a cycle of 418 years (19 × 22) for Theodosius, and reckoned
          the days on which Easter would fall for 100 years from the first
          year of the consulate of Theodosius (380 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_976" id="note_976" class="pginternal">976.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The great Archbishop of Alexandria,
          412-444. He shortened the cycle of Theophilus, making a cycle of
          ninety-five years (19 × 5), for the sake of convenience. Part of
          his <span class="tei tei-q">“Computus Paschalis”</span>
          remains.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_977" id="note_977" class="pginternal">977.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A monk of the Western Church in the
          sixth century. The surname, <span class="tei tei-q">“Exiguus,”</span> refers, not to his stature, but to
          his humbleness of heart. Our method of dating from the Birth of
          Christ was begun by him. He revived the cycle of Victorius (or
          Victorinus) of Aquitaine (463 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>), hence called
          Dionysian. It was a cycle of 532 years, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">i.e.</span></span>
          the lunar cycle of 19 × the solar cycle of 28.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_978" id="note_978" class="pginternal">978.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg369">369</a>, note 5.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_979" id="note_979" class="pginternal">979.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Job, i, 20.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_980" id="note_980" class="pginternal">980.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Gen., xli, 14.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_981" id="note_981" class="pginternal">981.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">St. Matt., xvi, 18.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_982" id="note_982" class="pginternal">982.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Acts, viii, 20 (Vulgate). The origin
          of this form of tonsure was attributed to Simon Magus.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_983" id="note_983" class="pginternal">983.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Gal., v, 24.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_984" id="note_984" class="pginternal">984.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">St. James, i, 12.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_985" id="note_985" class="pginternal">985.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XV">15</a> and notes. It is uncertain whether this
          incident is to be connected with Adamnan's first or second visit to
          King Aldfrid.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_986" id="note_986" class="pginternal">986.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span>, Ireland; cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XV">15</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_987" id="note_987" class="pginternal">987.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">supra</span></span>,
          p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg359">359</a>, note 1.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_988" id="note_988" class="pginternal">988.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XVIII">18</a> and note; cc. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XIX">19</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XX">20</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIV">24</a>. He was killed in battle, but neither the
          locality nor the war is known.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_989" id="note_989" class="pginternal">989.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">He reigned two years, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.
          infra</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIII">23</a>. He belonged to a younger branch of the royal
          house of Northumbria. His father's name was Cuthwine, and Ceolwulf,
          who succeeded Osric (c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIII">23</a>), was his brother.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_990" id="note_990" class="pginternal">990.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Or, perhaps, <span class="tei tei-q">“bishop;”</span> cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_IV">III, 4</a>, note. For the circumstances which led
          Egbert to undertake his work among the Columban monasteries,
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_IX">9</a>. As the events narrated
          there were prior to 690 (Wilbrord's mission to Frisia), we may,
          perhaps, assume that he had been labouring during this long
          interval among the Columban monasteries in Ireland. In <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_IV">III, 4</a>, Bede places
          Egbert's arrival in Iona a year earlier.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_991" id="note_991" class="pginternal">991.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Rom., x, 2.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_992" id="note_992" class="pginternal">992.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg372">372</a>. This seems to be the meaning of the somewhat
          obscure sentence, <span class="tei tei-q">“... celebrationem, ut
          diximus, praecipuae solemnitatis sub figura coronae perpetis agere
          perdocuit.”</span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_993" id="note_993" class="pginternal">993.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">For the conversion of the Britons to
          Roman usages, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> cc. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XV">15</a> and <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XVIII">18</a>, notes.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_994" id="note_994" class="pginternal">994.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This is accurate enough in round
          numbers. Aidan's mission (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_III">III, 3</a>) was probably in 635.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_995" id="note_995" class="pginternal">995.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span>, 24th April. According to
          the Celtic rule, Easter Day could never have been so late, 21st
          April being the latest possible day, while the Romans might
          celebrate as late as 25th April.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_996" id="note_996" class="pginternal">996.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Osric had succeeded in 718. Simeon of
          Durham says he was a son of King <span class="tei tei-q">“Alfrid.”</span> It has been suggested (Dr. Stubbs, in
          Dict. of Christian Biog.) that this may mean Alchfrid, son of Oswy
          (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XIV">III, 14</a>,
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">et
          saep.</span></span>), further, that this Osric is to be identified
          with the Hwiccian sub-king, mentioned in <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXIII">IV, 23</a>, who may have
          found a refuge in Mercia, when Alchfrid was disinherited. Against
          this it has been maintained that the statement of Simeon of Durham
          may, with greater probability, be referred to Aldfrid, the
          successor of Egfrid and father of Osred.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_997" id="note_997" class="pginternal">997.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXVI">IV, 26</a>, and <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_VIII">V, 8</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_998" id="note_998" class="pginternal">998.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">From Bede we should infer that they
          all succeeded in 725, and the evidence of charters goes to show
          that Eadbert and Ethelbert began to reign jointly in that year.
          Florence of Worcester makes Eadbert and Ethelbert reign
          successively, and William of Malmesbury gives successive reigns of
          considerable length to all three brothers. This prolongs Alric's
          life beyond probability, and as his reign rests on no early
          evidence, Dr. Stubbs is inclined to set it aside altogether.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_999" id="note_999" class="pginternal">999.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_VIII">8</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1000" id="note_1000" class="pginternal">1000.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_III">II, 3</a> and note; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XIV">III, 14</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1001" id="note_1001" class="pginternal">1001.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Consecrated in 727 (Saxon Chronicle)
          and died in 739 (Simeon of Durham).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1002" id="note_1002" class="pginternal">1002.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This must refer to the battle of Tours
          in 732, in which Charles Martel defeated the Saracens. As the
          Ecclesiastical History was finished in 731, this passage must be
          regarded as a later insertion. For Bede's view with regard to the
          Saracens, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> his theological works
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">passim</span></span>. He believed them to be
          the descendants of Ishmael.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1003" id="note_1003" class="pginternal">1003.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">In 729; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span> c.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXII">22</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1004" id="note_1004" class="pginternal">1004.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">supra</span></span>,
          this chapter, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad init.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1005" id="note_1005" class="pginternal">1005.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Preface">Preface</a>, note 1, and the <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Continuation">Continuation</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1006" id="note_1006" class="pginternal">1006.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXII">22</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad init</span></span> and note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1007" id="note_1007" class="pginternal">1007.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span>, since 29th June, 693;
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span> c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_VIII">8</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          fin.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1008" id="note_1008" class="pginternal">1008.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">He received the pall in 733 and died
          in 734; cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Continuation">Continuation</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1009" id="note_1009" class="pginternal">1009.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Bredon in Worcestershire.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1010" id="note_1010" class="pginternal">1010.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Preface">Preface</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XVI">IV, 16</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XVIII">V, 18</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1011" id="note_1011" class="pginternal">1011.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span>, of the East Saxons. He
          died in 745; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Continuation">Continuation</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1012" id="note_1012" class="pginternal">1012.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Called also Worr. In the Act of the
          Council of Clovesho in 716 he signs as Bishop of Lichfield (to
          which at this time Leicester was united) along with his
          predecessor, Hedda, but the authenticity of the Act is not fully
          established, and it is generally supposed that he succeeded in 721.
          At his death in 737 (Simeon of Durham) Leicester was finally
          separated from Lichfield.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1013" id="note_1013" class="pginternal">1013.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">supra</span></span>,
          p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg378">378</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1014" id="note_1014" class="pginternal">1014.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The following
            list of the English bishoprics at the time when Bede closed his
            history [731 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>], will enable the
            reader to recognize those which belonged to each separate
            kingdom:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">KINGDOMS;
            SEES; PRELATES.<br/>
            Kent; Canterbury; Tatwine.<br/>
              Rochester; Aldwulf.<br/>
            East Saxons; London; Ingwald.<br/>
            East Angles; Dunwich; Aldbert.<br/>
              Elmham; Hadulac.<br/>
            West Saxons; Winchester; Daniel.<br/>
              Sherborne; Forthere.<br/>
            Mercia; Lichfield (to which Leicester had been reunited in 705);
            Aldwin.<br/>
              Hereford; Walhstod.<br/>
              Worcester; Wilfrid.<br/>
              Lindsey (Sidnacester); Cynibert.<br/>
            South Saxons; Selsey; Vacant.<br/>
            Northumbria; York; Wilfrid II.<br/>
              Lindisfarne; Ethelwald.<br/>
              Hexham; Acca.<br/>
              Whitern; Pechthelm.</p>
</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1015" id="note_1015" class="pginternal">1015.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Aldbert was Bishop of Dunwich, Hadulac
          of Elmham.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1016" id="note_1016" class="pginternal">1016.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XVIII">18</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1017" id="note_1017" class="pginternal">1017.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">supra</span></span>,
          p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg379">379</a>, note 6.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1018" id="note_1018" class="pginternal">1018.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span>, in Herefordshire. It is
          not certain when the see of Hereford was founded. Besides Putta
          (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_II">IV, 2</a>, and note), Florence of Worcester
          mentions Tyrhtel and Torthere as predecessors of Walhstod.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1019" id="note_1019" class="pginternal">1019.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This is Wilfrid, Bishop of Worcester,
          contemporary with Wilfrid II of York (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXIII">IV, 23</a>;
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_VI">V, 6</a>). He
          succeeded St. Egwin, whom Bede strangely omits to mention, the
          successor of Oftfor (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXIII">IV, 23</a>). For the Hwiccas, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> II,
          2, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg084">84</a>, and for the see
          of Worcester, IV, 23, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg273">273</a>, note 7.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1020" id="note_1020" class="pginternal">1020.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. Preface, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg004">4</a>, and <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XII">IV, 12</a>. For Lindsey as a separate bishopric,
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ibid.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1021" id="note_1021" class="pginternal">1021.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XVI">IV, 16</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1022" id="note_1022" class="pginternal">1022.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XVIII">18</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad fin.</span></span>, and notes.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1023" id="note_1023" class="pginternal">1023.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">He was a son of Penda's brother,
          Alweo. He had lived at one time in retirement near the hermitage of
          St. Guthlac, flying from the enmity of Ceolred, but on the death of
          the latter in 716, he succeeded to the throne. Though he is not
          included in Bede's list of Bretwaldas (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_V">II, 5</a>), he established the supremacy of
          Mercia for twenty years over all England south of the Humber, till
          in 754 Wessex freed itself in the battle of Burford. For his wars
          with Wessex and Northumbria, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Continuation">Continuation</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sub</span></span> 740
          and 750. There is a charter of his dated 749 in which he grants
          certain ecclesiastical privileges, <span class="tei tei-q">“pro
          expiatione delictorum suorum.”</span> His oppression of the Church
          and his private life are rebuked in the letter of Boniface and five
          German bishops addressed to him (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
          Haddan and Stubbs, III, 350).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1024" id="note_1024" class="pginternal">1024.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Wilfrid II, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXIII">IV, 23</a>, and
          note; cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_VI">V,
          6</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1025" id="note_1025" class="pginternal">1025.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. c. 12, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg331">331</a>, and note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1026" id="note_1026" class="pginternal">1026.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XIII">III, 13</a>, and note; cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XIV">IV, 14</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XX">V, 20</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1027" id="note_1027" class="pginternal">1027.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. cc. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XIII">13</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XVIII">18</a>. For the <span class="tei tei-q">“White
          House”</span> (Whitern), <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_IV">III, 4</a>, and note. About this time (the
          exact date is not known) it became an Anglian see, a fact which
          indicates that in spite of the defeat of Egfrid in 685, which freed
          the Northern Picts, the Picts of Galloway were still subject to
          Northumbria. The bishopric came to an end about the close of the
          century, when the Northumbrian power had fallen into decay.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1028" id="note_1028" class="pginternal">1028.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The Scots of Dalriada (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_I">I, 1</a>). They had recovered
          their liberty after the defeat and death of Egfrid; cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXVI">IV, 26</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1029" id="note_1029" class="pginternal">1029.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ibid.</span></span>,
          and p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg376">376</a>, note 1.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1030" id="note_1030" class="pginternal">1030.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">External peace apparently. For the
          internal state of Northumbria, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.s.</span></span> p.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg378">378</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1031" id="note_1031" class="pginternal">1031.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">For the accuracy of these dates, cf.
          the notes on the events as they occur in the narrative.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1032" id="note_1032" class="pginternal">1032.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The length of his pontificate is not
          mentioned in the narrative.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1033" id="note_1033" class="pginternal">1033.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This and the two following entries are
          not in the narrative.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1034" id="note_1034" class="pginternal">1034.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ida was the first king of Bernicia,
          and one of the leaders of the English invasion. He conquered the
          country about Bamborough, which he is said to have founded (cf.
          <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_VI">III, 6</a>), and
          settled his people here. Deira, which was for a time a separate
          kingdom, was finally united to Bernicia under the strong rule of
          Oswald, Ida's great grandson (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ib. ad fin.</span></span>), who through his
          mother, Acha, was descended also from the royal house of
          Deira.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1035" id="note_1035" class="pginternal">1035.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">By Scotland, as usual, Ireland is
          meant.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1036" id="note_1036" class="pginternal">1036.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Wulfhere's death is not mentioned in
          the narrative.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1037" id="note_1037" class="pginternal">1037.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This is not in the narrative. For
          Osthryth cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XI">III,
          11</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXI">IV,
          21</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1038" id="note_1038" class="pginternal">1038.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Not in the narrative. Berctred is
          probably to be identified with Berct in <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXVI">IV, 26</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad
          init</span></span>. (Ulster Annals: <span class="tei tei-q">“Brectrid”</span>; Sax. Chron.: <span class="tei tei-q">“Briht.”</span>)</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1039" id="note_1039" class="pginternal">1039.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Above it is said that he succeeded in
          675, making his reign twenty-nine years, and this agrees with the
          Saxon Chronicle. Wilfrid, on his return to England in 705, found
          him already an abbot. (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XIX">V, 19</a>.)</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1040" id="note_1040" class="pginternal">1040.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Not in the narrative. Bertfrid was
          Osred's chief ealdorman, and was besieged with him in Bamborough by
          the usurper Eadwulf; cf. p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg342">342</a>, note 2. We find him acting as spokesman in
          the Council on the Nidd (V, 19, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg356">356</a>) in demanding to have the Papal letters
          translated into English.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1041" id="note_1041" class="pginternal">1041.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">For Bede's life, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
          Introduction.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1042" id="note_1042" class="pginternal">1042.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">IV, 18, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg257">257</a>, note 3.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1043" id="note_1043" class="pginternal">1043.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ibid.</span></span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1044" id="note_1044" class="pginternal">1044.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ibid.</span></span>, note 4, cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXI">V, 21</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1045" id="note_1045" class="pginternal">1045.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">John of Beverley, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXIII">IV, 23</a>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_II">V, 2-6</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1046" id="note_1046" class="pginternal">1046.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">For a full
            account of Bede's works, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> Plummer, vol. I,
            Introduction, or Dictionary of Christian Biography, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span>
<span class="tei tei-q">“Beda.”</span> Besides the works
            mentioned in this list, the following are certainly genuine:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The short
            <span class="tei tei-q">“Epistola ad Albinum”</span> (sent with a
            copy of the Ecclesiastical History).</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Retractationes in Acta.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Epistola ad Egberctum.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“De locis Sanctis”</span> (to which Bede alludes in
            <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XVII">V. 17</a>). A
            number of other works, some certainly, others probably spurious,
            and a few possibly genuine, have been attributed to him.</p>
</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1047" id="note_1047" class="pginternal">1047.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">An answer to questions put to him by
          Nothelm (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> Preface, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg002">2</a>, note 4, and <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Continuation">Continuation</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sub</span></span>
          735).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1048" id="note_1048" class="pginternal">1048.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-q">“Parabolae”</span> = comparisons. <span class="tei tei-q">“Parabolae Salomonis”</span> are the first words of the
          Book of Proverbs in the Vulgate.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1049" id="note_1049" class="pginternal">1049.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span>, St. Paul.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1050" id="note_1050" class="pginternal">1050.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Isa., xxiv, 22.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1051" id="note_1051" class="pginternal">1051.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_III">III, 3</a>, note; cf. III, 25, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg198">198</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1052" id="note_1052" class="pginternal">1052.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A priest of Nola in Campania. He was
          of Syrian extraction, but born at Nola, and ordained priest
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">circ.</span></span> 250 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span> He was persecuted
          under Decius, and again under Valerian, but escaped. His history is
          told in the poems of Paulinus, Bishop of Nola (409-431).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1053" id="note_1053" class="pginternal">1053.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This work is not known to exist.
          Probably the saint is Anastasius the Younger, Patriarch of Antioch,
          killed in 610 by the Jews in a sedition on 21st December, and in
          the Roman martyrology honoured on that day as a martyr
          (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> Butler, <span class="tei tei-q">“Lives of the Saints”</span>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1054" id="note_1054" class="pginternal">1054.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXVI">IV, 26-32</a>.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1055" id="note_1055" class="pginternal">1055.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">For Benedict and Ceolfrid,
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XVIII">IV, 18</a>. Huaetbert belonged to the monastery
          of Wearmouth and Jarrow from his earliest childhood, and succeeded
          Ceolfrid as abbot in 716. He survived Bede. The latter dedicated
          his commentary on the Apocalypse and the De temp. Rat. to him under
          his name of Eusebius given him for his piety (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span>
          Bede's Hist. Abb. and Anon., Hist. Abb.).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1056" id="note_1056" class="pginternal">1056.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">(Only names which have not occurred in
          the narrative are annotated; references for those already mentioned
          will be found in the Index.) The Continuation is by a later hand.
          But Mr. Plummer considers that the entries under the years 731,
          732, 733 and 734, may have been added by Bede himself. They appear
          in the great Moore MS., and those for 733 and 734 also in another
          eighth century MS. The entries enclosed in square brackets are
          found in a fifteenth century MS.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1057" id="note_1057" class="pginternal">1057.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">He succeeded Wilfrid II, and two years
          later became Archbishop of York (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.
          infra</span></span> under 735). It was to him that Bede addressed
          the <span class="tei tei-q">“Epist. ad Egberctum.”</span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1058" id="note_1058" class="pginternal">1058.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Bishop of Lindsey.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1059" id="note_1059" class="pginternal">1059.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Bishop of Selsey.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1060" id="note_1060" class="pginternal">1060.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I.e.</span></span>, of York.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1061" id="note_1061" class="pginternal">1061.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Bishop of Hexham.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1062" id="note_1062" class="pginternal">1062.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Bishop of Whitern.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1063" id="note_1063" class="pginternal">1063.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The early authorities differ as to the
          year, but this is the traditional date, and is usually
          accepted.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1064" id="note_1064" class="pginternal">1064.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">King of Northumbria 737-758
          (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.
          infra</span></span>); died in 768. He was a son of Eata, called by
          Nennius, Eata <span class="tei tei-q">“Glinmaur,”</span> a
          descendant of Ida, and was the brother of Archbishop Egbert. Under
          him the Northumbrian power revived for a period.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1065" id="note_1065" class="pginternal">1065.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">He was the kinsman and predecessor of
          Cuthred (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v. infra</span></span>).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1066" id="note_1066" class="pginternal">1066.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Archbishop of Canterbury in succession
          to Nothelm. The first archbishop not buried in St. Augustine's,
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> II, 3, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg090">90</a>, note.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1067" id="note_1067" class="pginternal">1067.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Bishop of Lindisfarne in succession to
          Ethelwald (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XII">V,
          12</a>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ad fin.</span></span>, note).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1068" id="note_1068" class="pginternal">1068.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Probably a son of that Eadwulf who
          usurped the throne of Northumbria at Aldfrid's death (<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XVIII">V, 18</a>); cf. Simeon of
          Durham, II, 38 (Rolls Series), <span class="tei tei-q">“Arwine
          filius Eadulfi.”</span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1069" id="note_1069" class="pginternal">1069.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Not known.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1070" id="note_1070" class="pginternal">1070.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Charles Martel.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1071" id="note_1071" class="pginternal">1071.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pippin the Short. Carloman resigned in
          747, and became a monk.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1072" id="note_1072" class="pginternal">1072.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">There is a letter of Boniface
          (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> Haddan and Stubbs III, 358)
          to a priest, Herefrid, who is supposed to be the man mentioned
          here.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1073" id="note_1073" class="pginternal">1073.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This seems confused and obscure. The
          West Saxons under Cuthred threw off the Mercian yoke in the
          insurrection which culminated in the battle of Burford
          (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.</span></span> V. 23, p. <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Pg380">380</a>, note 9). Oengus or Angus (the
          Brythonic form is Ungust), son of Fergus, was a Pictish king who
          crushed the Dalriadic Scots, and, in alliance with Eadbert of
          Northumbria, conquered the Britons of Strathclyde. But this does
          not explain the strange statement which brings him into connection
          with Ethelbald of Mercia. Nor is it told who Eanred was. Theudor
          was a king of the Britons of Strathclyde. Kyle is a district in
          Ayrshire.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1074" id="note_1074" class="pginternal">1074.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Adopting the emendation <span class="tei tei-q">“quinto Idus”</span> (Hussey). The date is thus right
          for the eclipses, but the year is the sixteenth of Eadbert.
          Probably the numeral (XVI) has fallen out, and the passage ought to
          run: <span class="tei tei-q">“anno regni Eadbercti XVI, quinto Id.
          Ian.”</span></dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1075" id="note_1075" class="pginternal">1075.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The great missionary bishop of
          Germany, a West Saxon by birth. He crossed to the Continent
          <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">circ.</span></span> 716, and, supported by
          Charles Martel and his sons, evangelized Central Europe, became
          Archbishop of Mainz, and founded sees throughout Germany. Finally
          he was martyred in Frisland. Lul, a West Saxon, was his successor,
          not Redger, but it has been suggested that this may be another name
          for him. The pope is Stephen III.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1076" id="note_1076" class="pginternal">1076.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">He is said by William of Malmesbury to
          have been the murderer of Ethelbald. After a year of anarchy Offa
          succeeded, and retrieved the position of Mercia.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1077" id="note_1077" class="pginternal">1077.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">He was killed in an insurrection in
          784. (Sax. Chron.)</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1078" id="note_1078" class="pginternal">1078.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">St. Matt. xi, 12. After Eadbert,
          Northumbria fell into a state of anarchy, obscure kings contending
          for the throne.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1079" id="note_1079" class="pginternal">1079.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cf. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">supra,
          sub</span></span> 750.</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1080" id="note_1080" class="pginternal">1080.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">An aetheling killed by Moll, king of
          Northumbria, at a place called Edwin's Cliff (Sax. Chron.).</dd>
<dt class="tei tei-notelabel"><a href="#noteref_1081" id="note_1081" class="pginternal">1081.</a></dt>
<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Of Northumbria.</dd>
</dl>
</div>
<hr class="doublepage"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 5.00em; margin-top: 5.00em">
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em" id="pgfooter">
<pre class="pre tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 3.00em; margin-top: 3.00em"/></div></div></div></div></body>
</html>