<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-4" id="chapter-4-14" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">How a pestilence ceased through the intercession of King Oswald. [681-686 a.d.]</p>
			</header>
			<p>In this
			monastery, at that time, certain special manifestations of the
			heavenly grace are said to have been shown forth; in as much as the
			tyranny of the Devil had been recently cast out and Christ had
			begun to reign there. Of these I have thought it proper to
			perpetuate the memory of one which the most reverend Bishop
			Acca<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-626" id="noteref-626" epub:type="noteref">626</a> was
			wont often to relate to me, affirming that it had been told him by
			most creditable brothers of the same monastery. About the same time
			that this province had received the faith of Christ, a grievous
			pestilence fell upon many provinces of Britain; which, also, by the
			Divine dispensation, reached to the aforesaid monastery, then
			governed by the most religious priest of Christ, Eappa;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-627" id="noteref-627" epub:type="noteref">627</a> and
			many, as well of those that had come thither with the bishop, as of
			those of the same province of the South Saxons who had been lately
			called to the faith, were snatched away out of this world. The
			brethren, therefore, thought fit to keep a fast of three days, and
			humbly to implore the Divine goodness to vouchsafe to have mercy on
			them, either by delivering from instant death those that were in
			danger by reason of the disease, or by saving those who were
			hurried out of this life from the eternal damnation of their
			souls.</p>
			<p>There was at
			that time in the monastery, a little boy, of the Saxon nation,
			lately called to the faith, who had been attacked by the same
			infirmity, and had long kept his bed. On the second day of the
			aforesaid fasting and <!--Page 249-->
			prayer, it happened about the second hour of the day, that this boy
			was left alone in the place where he lay sick, when on a sudden,
			through the Divine disposition, the most blessed chiefs of the
			Apostles vouchsafed to appear to him; for he was a boy of a very
			simple and gentle disposition, and with sincere devotion observed
			the mysteries of the faith which he had received. The Apostles
			therefore, greeting him with loving words, said, <span class="tei tei-q">“My son, fear not death, concerning which thou art
			troubled; for this day we will bring thee to the kingdom of Heaven;
			but first thou must needs wait till the Masses are celebrated, that
			having received thy voyage provision,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-628" id="noteref-628" epub:type="noteref">628</a> the
			Body and Blood of our Lord, and so being set free from sickness and
			death, thou mayest be taken up to the everlasting joys in
			Heaven.</span></p>
			<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Call therefore to thee the priest, Eappa, and tell
			him, that the Lord has heard your prayers, and has favourably
			looked upon your devotion and your fast, and not one more shall die
			of this plague, either in the monastery or the lands adjacent to
			it; but all your people who any where labour under this sickness,
			shall be raised up from their weakness, and restored to their
			former health, saving thee alone, who art this day to be delivered
			from death, and to be carried into Heaven, to behold our Lord
			Christ, whom thou hast faithfully served. This favour the Divine
			mercy has vouchsafed to grant you, through the intercession of the
			godly King Oswald, beloved of God, who formerly nobly ruled over
			the nation of the Northumbrians, with the authority of a temporal
			kingdom and the devotion of Christian piety which leads to the
			eternal kingdom. For this very day that king was killed in body by
			the infidels in war, and straightway taken up to Heaven to the
			everlasting joys of souls, and brought into fellowship with the
			number of the elect. Let them look in their records,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-629" id="noteref-629" epub:type="noteref">629</a>
			wherein the <!--Page 250-->
			burial of the dead is set down, and they will find that he was,
			this day, as we have said, taken out of this world. Let them,
			therefore, celebrate Masses in all the oratories of this monastery,
			either in thanksgiving because their prayers are heard, or else in
			memory of the aforesaid King Oswald, who once governed their
			nation,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-630" id="noteref-630" epub:type="noteref">630</a> and
			therefore humbly prayed to the Lord for them, as for converts of
			his nation; and let all the brethren assemble in the church, and
			all communicate in the heavenly Sacrifices, and so let them cease
			to fast, and refresh the body also with the food that belongs to
			it.”</span></p>
			<p>The boy called
			the priest, and repeated all these words to him; and the priest
			carefully inquired after the habit and form of the men that had
			appeared to him. He answered, <span class="tei tei-q">“Their habit
			was altogether noble, and their countenances most pleasant and
			beautiful, such as I had never seen before, nor did I think there
			could be any men so fair and comely. One of them indeed was shorn
			like a clerk, the other had a long beard; and they said that one of
			them was called Peter, the other Paul; and they were the servants
			of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, sent by Him from Heaven to
			protect our monastery.”</span> The priest believed what the boy
			said, and going thence immediately, looked in his chronicle, and
			found that King Oswald had been killed on that very day. He then
			called the brethren, ordered dinner to be provided, Masses to be
			said, and all of them to communicate as usual; causing also a part
			of the same Sacrifice of the Lord's Oblation to be carried to the
			sick boy.</p>
			<p>Soon after this,
			the boy died, on that same day; and by his death proved that the
			words which he had heard from the Apostles of Christ were true. And
			this moreover bore witness to the truth of his words, that none
			besides himself, belonging to the same monastery, was taken away at
			that time. And without doubt, by this vision, many that heard of it
			were wonderfully excited <!--Page 251-->
			to implore the Divine mercy in adversity, and to submit to the
			wholesome remedy of fasting. From that time, the day of
			commemoration of that king and soldier of Christ began to be yearly
			honoured with the celebration of Masses, not only in that
			monastery, but in many other places.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
