<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-1" id="chapter-1-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">How the Emperor Severus divided from the rest by a rampart that part of Britain which had been recovered.</p>
			</header>
			<p>In the year of
			our Lord 189, Severus, an African, born at Leptis, in the province
			of Tripolis, became emperor.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-43" id="noteref-43" epub:type="noteref">43</a> He was
			the seventeenth from Augustus, and reigned seventeen years. Being
			naturally of a harsh disposition, and engaged in many wars, he
			governed the state vigorously, but with much trouble. Having been
			victorious in all the grievous civil wars which happened in his
			time, he was drawn into Britain by the revolt of almost all the
			confederated tribes; and, after many great and severe battles, he
			thought fit to divide that part of the island, which he had
			recovered, from the other unconquered nations, not <!--Page 013-->with a wall, as some imagine, but with
			a rampart.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-44" id="noteref-44" epub:type="noteref">44</a> For a
			wall is made of stones, but a rampart, with which camps are
			fortified to repel the assaults of enemies, is made of sods, cut
			out of the earth, and raised high above the ground, like a wall,
			having in front of it the trench whence the sods were taken, with
			strong stakes of wood fixed above it. Thus Severus drew a great
			trench and strong rampart, fortified with several towers, from sea
			to sea. And there, at York, he fell sick afterwards and died,
			leaving two sons, Bassianus and Geta;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-45" id="noteref-45" epub:type="noteref">45</a> of
			whom Geta died, adjudged an enemy of the State; but Bassianus,
			having taken the surname of Antonius, obtained the empire.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
