<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2" id="chapter-2-15" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XV</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">How the province of the East Angles received the faith of Christ. [627-628 a.d.]</p>
			</header>
			<p>Edwin was so
			zealous for the true worship, that he likewise persuaded Earpwald,
			king of the East Angles, and son of Redwald, to abandon his
			idolatrous superstitions, <!--Page 121-->
			and with his whole province to receive the faith and mysteries of
			Christ. And indeed his father Redwald had long before been
			initiated into the mysteries of the Christian faith in Kent, but in
			vain; for on his return home, he was seduced by his wife and
			certain perverse teachers, and turned aside from the sincerity of
			the faith; and thus his latter state was worse than the former; so
			that, like the Samaritans of old, he seemed at the same time to
			serve Christ and the gods whom he served before; and in the same
			temple he had an altar for the Christian Sacrifice, and another
			small one at which to offer victims to devils. Aldwulf,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-245" id="noteref-245" epub:type="noteref">245</a> king
			of that same province, who lived in our time, testifies that this
			temple had stood until his time, and that he had seen it when he
			was a boy. The aforesaid King Redwald was noble by birth, though
			ignoble in his actions, being the son of Tytilus, whose father was
			Uuffa, from whom the kings of the East Angles are called
			Uuffings.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-246" id="noteref-246" epub:type="noteref">246</a></p>
			<p>Earpwald, not
			long after he had embraced the Christian faith, was slain by one
			Ricbert, a pagan; and from that time the province was in error for
			three years, till Sigbert succeeded to the kingdom,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-247" id="noteref-247" epub:type="noteref">247</a>
			brother to the same Earpwald, a most Christian and learned man, who
			was banished, and went to live in Gaul during his brother's life,
			and was there initiated into the mysteries of the faith, whereof he
			made it his business to cause all his province to partake as soon
			as he came to the throne. His exertions were nobly promoted by
			Bishop Felix,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-248" id="noteref-248" epub:type="noteref">248</a>
			<!--Page 122-->who, coming to
			Honorius, the archbishop,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-249" id="noteref-249" epub:type="noteref">249</a> from
			the parts of Burgundy, where he had been born and ordained, and
			having told him what he desired, was sent by him to preach the Word
			of life to the aforesaid nation of the Angles. Nor were his good
			wishes in vain; for the pious labourer in the spiritual field
			reaped therein a great harvest of believers, delivering all that
			province (according to the inner signification of his name) from
			long iniquity and unhappiness, and bringing it to the faith and
			works of righteousness, and the gifts of everlasting happiness. He
			had the see of his bishopric appointed him in the city
			Dommoc,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-250" id="noteref-250" epub:type="noteref">250</a> and
			having presided over the same province with pontifical authority
			seventeen years, he ended his days there in peace.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
