<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>X</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-5" id="chapter-5-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<!--Page 320-->
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">X</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">How Wilbrord, preaching in Frisland, converted many to Christ; and how his two companions, the Hewalds, suffered martyrdom. [690 a.d.]</p>
			</header>
			<p>When the man of
			God, Egbert, perceived that neither he himself was permitted to go
			and preach to the nations, being withheld for the sake of some
			other advantage to the holy Church, whereof he had been forewarned
			by a revelation; nor that Wictbert, when he went into those parts,
			had availed to do anything; he nevertheless still attempted to send
			holy and industrious men to the work of the Word, among whom the
			most notable was Wilbrord,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-824" id="noteref-824" epub:type="noteref">824</a> a man
			eminent for his merit and rank as priest. They arrived there,
			twelve in number, and turning aside to Pippin,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-825" id="noteref-825" epub:type="noteref">825</a> duke
			of the Franks, were gladly received by him; and as he had lately
			subdued the nearer part of Frisland, and expelled King
			Rathbed,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-826" id="noteref-826" epub:type="noteref">826</a> he
			sent them thither to preach, supporting them at the same time with
			his sovereign authority, that none might molest them in their
			preaching, and bestowing many favours on those who consented to
			receive the faith. Thus it came to pass, that with the help of the
			Divine grace, in a short time they converted many from idolatry to
			the faith of Christ.</p>
			<p>Following their
			example, two other priests of the English nation, who had long
			lived as strangers in Ireland, for the sake of the eternal country,
			went into the <!--Page 321-->
			province of the Old Saxons, if haply they could there win any to
			Christ by their preaching. They were alike in name as in devotion,
			Hewald being the name of both, with this distinction, that, on
			account of the different colour of their hair, the one was called
			Black Hewald and the other White Hewald.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-827" id="noteref-827" epub:type="noteref">827</a> They
			were both full of religious piety, but Black Hewald was the more
			learned of the two in Scripture. When they came into the province,
			these men took up their lodging in the guesthouse of a certain
			township-reeve, and asked of him that he would conduct them to the
			ealdorman<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-828" id="noteref-828" epub:type="noteref">828</a> who
			was over him, for that they had a message concerning matters of
			importance to communicate to him. For those Old Saxons have no
			king, but many ealdormen set over their nation; and when any war is
			on the point of breaking out, they cast lots indifferently, and on
			whomsoever the lot falls, him they all follow and obey during the
			time of war; but as soon as the war is ended, all those ealdormen
			are again equal in power. So the reeve received and entertained
			them in his house some days, promising to send them to the
			ealdorman who was over him, as they desired.</p>
			<p>But when the
			barbarians perceived that they were of another religion,—for they
			continually gave themselves to singing of psalms and prayer, and
			daily offered up to God the Sacrifice of the saving Victim, having
			with them sacred vessels and a consecrated table for an altar,—they
			began to grow suspicious of them, lest if they should come into the
			presence of their ealdorman, and converse with him, they should
			turn his heart from their gods, and convert him to the new religion
			of the Christian <!--Page 322-->
			faith; and thus by degrees all their province should be forced to
			change its old worship for a new. Wherefore on a sudden they laid
			hold of them and put them to death; and White Hewald they slew
			outright with the sword; but they put Black Hewald to lingering
			torture and tore him limb from limb in horrible fashion, and they
			threw their bodies into the Rhine. The ealdorman, whom they had
			desired to see, hearing of it, was very angry that strangers who
			desired to come to him had not been suffered to come; and therefore
			he sent and put to death all those villagers and burned their
			village. The aforesaid priests and servants of Christ suffered on
			the 3rd of October.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-829" id="noteref-829" epub:type="noteref">829</a></p>
			<p>Miracles from
			Heaven were not lacking at their martyrdom. For their dead bodies,
			having been cast into the river by the pagans, as has been said,
			were carried against the stream for the space of almost forty
			miles, to the place where their companions were. Moreover, a long
			ray of light, reaching up to heaven, shone every night above them
			wheresoever they chanced to be, and that too in the sight of the
			very pagans that had slain them. Moreover, one of them appeared in
			a vision by night to one of his companions, whose name was Tilmon,
			a man of renown and of noble birth in this world, who having been a
			thegn had become a monk, telling him that he might find their
			bodies in that place, where he should see rays of light reaching
			from heaven to the earth. And so it befell; and their bodies being
			found, were buried with the honour due to martyrs; and the day of
			their passion or of the finding of their bodies, is celebrated in
			those parts with fitting veneration. Finally, Pippin, the most
			glorious duke of the Franks, learning these things, caused the
			bodies to be brought to him, and buried them with much honour in
			the church of the city of Cologne, on the Rhine.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-830" id="noteref-830" epub:type="noteref">830</a> And
			it is said that a spring burst forth in the place where they were
			killed, which to this day affords a plentiful stream in that same
			place.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
