<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-5" id="chapter-5-16" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">The account given in the aforesaid book of the place of our Lord's Nativity, Passion, and Resurrection.</p>
			</header>
			<p>He wrote
			concerning the place of the Nativity of our Lord, after this
			manner:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-861" id="noteref-861" epub:type="noteref">861</a>
			<span class="tei tei-q">“Bethlehem, the city of David, is situated
			on a narrow ridge, encompassed on all sides with valleys, being a
			mile in length from west to east, and having a low wall without
			towers, built along the edge of the level summit. In the eastern
			corner thereof <!--Page 339-->
			is a sort of natural half cave, the outward part whereof is said to
			have been the place where our Lord was born; the inner is called
			the manger of our Lord. This cave within is all covered with rich
			marble, and over the particular spot where our Lord is said to have
			been born, stands the great church of St. Mary.”</span> He likewise
			wrote about the place of His Passion and Resurrection in this
			manner: <span class="tei tei-q">“Entering the city of Jerusalem on
			the north side, the first place to be visited, according to the
			disposition of the streets, is the church of Constantine, called
			the Martyrium. It was built by the Emperor Constantine, in a royal
			and magnificent manner, because the Cross of our Lord was said to
			have been found there by his mother Helena. Thence, to the
			westward, is seen the church of Golgotha, in which is also to be
			found the rock which once bore the Cross to which the Lord's body
			was nailed, and now it upholds a large silver cross, having a great
			brazen wheel with lamps hanging over it. Under the place of our
			Lord's Cross, a crypt is hewn out of the rock, in which the
			Sacrifice is offered on an altar for the dead that are held in
			honour, their bodies remaining meanwhile in the street. To the
			westward of this church is the round church of the Anastasis or
			Resurrection of our Lord, encompassed with three walls, and
			supported by twelve columns. Between each of the walls is a broad
			passage, which contains three altars at three different points of
			the middle wall; to the south, the north, and the west. It has
			eight doors or entrances in a straight line through the three
			walls; four whereof face the south-east, and four the east.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-862" id="noteref-862" epub:type="noteref">862</a> In
			the midst of it is the round tomb of our Lord cut out of the rock,
			the top of of which a man standing within can touch with his hand;
			on the east is the entrance, against which that great stone was
			set. To this day the tomb bears the marks of the iron tools within,
			but on the outside it is all covered with marble to the very top of
			the roof, which is adorned with gold, and bears a large golden
			cross. In the north <!--Page 340-->
			part of the tomb the sepulchre of our Lord is hewn out of the same
			rock, seven feet in length, and three hand-breadths above the
			floor; the entrance being on the south side, where twelve lamps
			burn day and night, four within the sepulchre, and eight above on
			the edge of the right side. The stone that was set at the entrance
			to the tomb is now cleft in two; nevertheless, the lesser part of
			it stands as an altar of hewn stone before the door of the tomb;
			the greater part is set up as another altar, four-cornered, at the
			east end of the same church, and is covered with linen cloths. The
			colour of the said tomb and sepulchre is white and red mingled
			together.”</span><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-863" id="noteref-863" epub:type="noteref">863</a></p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
