<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-4" id="chapter-4-23" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">Of the life and death of the Abbess Hilda. [614-680 a.d.]</p>
			</header>
			<p>In the year after this, that is the year of our Lord 680, the most religious handmaid of Christ, Hilda,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-681" id="noteref-681" epub:type="noteref">681</a> abbess of the monastery that is called Streanaeshalch,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-682" id="noteref-682" epub:type="noteref">682</a> as we mentioned above, after having done many heavenly deeds on earth, passed thence to receive the rewards of the heavenly life, on the 17th of November, at the age of sixty-six years. Her life falls into two equal parts, for the first thirty-three years of it she spent living most nobly in the secular habit; and still more nobly dedicated the remaining half to the Lord in the monastic life. For she was nobly born, being the daughter of Hereric,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-683" id="noteref-683" epub:type="noteref">683</a> nephew to King Edwin, and with that king she also received <!--Page 271-->the faith and mysteries of Christ, at the preaching of Paulinus, of blessed memory,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-684" id="noteref-684" epub:type="noteref">684</a> the first bishop of the Northumbrians, and preserved the same undefiled till she attained to the vision of our Lord in Heaven.</p>
			<p>When she had resolved to quit the secular habit, and to serve Him alone, she withdrew into the province of the East Angles, for she was allied to the king there;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-685" id="noteref-685" epub:type="noteref">685</a> being desirous to cross over thence into Gaul, forsaking her native country and all that she had, and so to live a stranger for our Lord's sake in the monastery of Cale,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-686" id="noteref-686" epub:type="noteref">686</a> that she might the better attain to the eternal country in heaven. For her sister Heresuid, mother to Aldwulf,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-687" id="noteref-687" epub:type="noteref">687</a> king of the East Angles, was at that time living in the same monastery, under regular discipline, waiting for an everlasting crown; and led by her example, she continued a whole year in the aforesaid province, with the design of going abroad; but afterwards, Bishop Aidan recalled her to her home, and she received land to the extent of one family on the north side of the river Wear;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-688" id="noteref-688" epub:type="noteref">688</a> where likewise for a year she led a monastic life, with very few companions.</p>
			<p>After this she was made abbess in the monastery called Heruteu,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-689" id="noteref-689" epub:type="noteref">689</a> which monastery had been founded, not long before, by the pious handmaid of Christ, Heiu,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-690" id="noteref-690" epub:type="noteref">690</a> who is said to have been the first woman in the province of the Northumbrians who took upon her the vows and habit of a nun, being consecrated by Bishop Aidan; but she, soon after she had founded that monastery, retired to the city of Calcaria,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-691" id="noteref-691" epub:type="noteref">691</a> which is called Kaelcacaestir <!--Page 272--> by the English, and there fixed her dwelling. Hilda, the handmaid of Christ, being set over that monastery, began immediately to order it in all things under a rule of life, according as she had been instructed by learned men; for Bishop Aidan, and others of the religious that knew her, frequently visited her and loved her heartily, and diligently instructed her, because of her innate wisdom and love of the service of God.</p>
			<p>When she had for some years governed this monastery, wholly intent upon establishing a rule of life, it happened that she also undertook either to build or to set in order a monastery in the place called Streanaeshalch, and this work which was laid upon her she industriously performed; for she put this monastery under the same rule of monastic life as the former; and taught there the strict observance of justice, piety, chastity, and other virtues, and particularly of peace and charity; so that, after the example of the primitive Church, no one there was rich, and none poor, for they had all things common, and none had any private property. Her prudence was so great, that not only meaner men in their need, but sometimes even kings and princes, sought and received her counsel; she obliged those who were under her direction to give so much time to reading of the Holy Scriptures, and to exercise themselves so much in works of justice, that many might readily be found there fit for the priesthood and the service of the altar.</p>
			<p>Indeed we have seen five from that monastery who afterwards became bishops, and all of them men of singular merit and sanctity, whose names were Bosa,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-692" id="noteref-692" epub:type="noteref">692</a> Aetla,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-693" id="noteref-693" epub:type="noteref">693</a> <!--Page 273-->Oftfor,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-694" id="noteref-694" epub:type="noteref">694</a> John,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-695" id="noteref-695" epub:type="noteref">695</a> and Wilfrid.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-696" id="noteref-696" epub:type="noteref">696</a> Of the first we have said above that he was consecrated bishop of York; of the second, it may be briefly stated that he was appointed bishop of Dorchester. Of the last two we shall tell hereafter, that the former was ordained bishop of Hagustald, the other of the church of York; of the third, we may here mention that, having applied himself to the reading and observance of the Scriptures in both the monasteries of the Abbess Hilda,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-697" id="noteref-697" epub:type="noteref">697</a> at length being desirous to attain to greater perfection, he went into Kent, to Archbishop Theodore, of blessed memory; where having spent some time in sacred studies, he resolved to go to Rome also, which, in those days, was esteemed a very salutary undertaking. Returning thence into Britain, he took his way into the province of the Hwiccas,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-698" id="noteref-698" epub:type="noteref">698</a> where King Osric then ruled,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-699" id="noteref-699" epub:type="noteref">699</a> and continued there a long time, preaching the Word of faith, and showing an example of good life to all that saw and heard him. At that time, Bosel, the bishop of that province,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-700" id="noteref-700" epub:type="noteref">700</a> laboured under <!--Page 274--> such weakness of body, that he could not himself perform episcopal functions; for which reason, Oftfor was, by universal consent, chosen bishop in his stead, and by order of King Ethelred,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-701" id="noteref-701" epub:type="noteref">701</a> consecrated by Bishop Wilfrid,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-702" id="noteref-702" epub:type="noteref">702</a> of blessed memory, who was then Bishop of the Midland Angles, because Archbishop Theodore was dead, and no other bishop ordained in his place. A little while before, that is, before the election of the aforesaid man of God, Bosel, Tatfrid,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-703" id="noteref-703" epub:type="noteref">703</a> a man of great industry and learning, and of excellent ability, had been chosen bishop for that province, from the monastery of the same abbess, but had been snatched away by an untimely death, before he could be ordained.</p>
			<p>Thus this handmaid of Christ, the Abbess Hilda, whom all that knew her called Mother, for her singular piety and grace, was not only an example of good life, to those that lived in her monastery, but afforded occasion of amendment and salvation to many who lived at a distance, to whom the blessed fame was brought of her industry and virtue. For it was meet that the dream of her mother, Bregusuid, during her infancy, should be fulfilled. Now Bregusuid, at the time that her husband, Hereric, lived in banishment, under Cerdic,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-704" id="noteref-704" epub:type="noteref">704</a> king of the Britons, where he was also poisoned, fancied, in a dream, that he was suddenly taken away from her and she was seeking for him most carefully, but could find no sign of him anywhere. After an anxious search for him, all at once she found a most precious necklace under her garment, and whilst she was looking on it very attentively, it seemed to shine forth with such a blaze of light that it filled all Britain with the glory of its brilliance. This dream was doubtless fulfilled in her daughter that <!--Page 275-->we speak of, whose life was an example of the works of light, not only blessed to herself, but to many who desired to live aright.</p>
			<p>When she had governed this monastery many years, it pleased Him Who has made such merciful provision for our salvation, to give her holy soul the trial of a long infirmity of the flesh, to the end that, according to the Apostle's example, her virtue might be made perfect in weakness. Struck down with a fever, she suffered from a burning heat, and was afflicted with the same trouble for six years continually; during all which time she never failed either to return thanks to her Maker, or publicly and privately to instruct the flock committed to her charge; for taught by her own experience she admonished all men to serve the Lord dutifully, when health of body is granted to them, and always to return thanks faithfully to Him in adversity, or bodily infirmity. In the seventh year of her sickness, when the disease turned inwards, her last day came, and about cockcrow, having received the voyage provision<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-705" id="noteref-705" epub:type="noteref">705</a> of Holy Housel, and called together the handmaids of Christ that were within the same monastery, she admonished them to preserve the peace of the Gospel among themselves, and with all others; and even as she spoke her words of exhortation, she joyfully saw death come, or, in the words of our Lord, passed from death unto life.</p>
			<p>That same night it pleased Almighty God, by a manifest vision, to make known her death in another monastery, at a distance from hers, which she had built that same year, and which is called Hacanos.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-706" id="noteref-706" epub:type="noteref">706</a> There was in that monastery, a certain nun called Begu,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-707" id="noteref-707" epub:type="noteref">707</a> who, having dedicated her virginity to the Lord, had served Him upwards of thirty years in the monastic life. This nun was resting <!--Page 276-->in the dormitory of the sisters, when on a sudden she heard in the air the well-known sound of the bell, which used to awake and call them to prayers, when any one of them was taken out of this world, and opening her eyes, as she thought, she saw the roof of the house open, and a light shed from above filling all the place. Looking earnestly upon that light, she saw the soul of the aforesaid handmaid of God in that same light, being carried to heaven attended and guided by angels. Then awaking, and seeing the other sisters lying round about her, she perceived that what she had seen had been revealed to her either in a dream or a vision; and rising immediately in great fear, she ran to the virgin who then presided in the monastery in the place of the abbess,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-708" id="noteref-708" epub:type="noteref">708</a> and whose name was Frigyth, and, with many tears and lamentations, and heaving deep sighs, told her that the Abbess Hilda, mother of them all, had departed this life, and had in her sight ascended to the gates of eternal light, and to the company of the citizens of heaven, with a great light, and with angels for her guides. Frigyth having heard it, awoke all the sisters, and calling them to the church, admonished them to give themselves to prayer and singing of psalms, for the soul of their mother; which they did earnestly during the remainder of the night; and at break of day, the brothers came with news of her death, from the place where she had died. They answered that they knew it before, and then related in order how and when they had learnt it, by which it appeared that her death had been revealed to them in a vision that same hour in which the brothers said that she had died. Thus by a fair harmony of events Heaven ordained, that when some saw her departure out of this world, the others should have knowledge of her entrance into the eternal life of souls. These monasteries are about thirteen miles distant from each other.</p>
			<p>It is also told, that her death was, in a vision, made known the same night to one of the virgins dedicated to <!--Page 277-->God, who loved her with a great love, in the same monastery where the said handmaid of God died. This nun saw her soul ascend to heaven in the company of angels; and this she openly declared, in the very same hour that it happened, to those handmaids of Christ that were with her; and aroused them to pray for her soul, even before the rest of the community had heard of her death. The truth of which was known to the whole community in the morning. This same nun was at that time with some other handmaids of Christ, in the remotest part of the monastery, where the women who had lately entered the monastic life were wont to pass their time of probation, till they were instructed according to rule, and admitted into the fellowship of the community.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
