<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-5" id="chapter-5-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">How he likewise recalled by his prayers a thegn's servant from death.</p>
			</header>
			<p>At another time
			also, being called to consecrate the church<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-787" id="noteref-787" epub:type="noteref">787</a> of a
			thegn named Addi, when he had performed the required duty, he was
			entreated by the thegn to go in to one of his servants, who lay
			dangerously ill, insomuch that having lost all use of his limbs, he
			seemed to be at the point of death; and moreover the coffin had
			been made ready wherein to bury him after his death. The thegn
			urged his entreaties with tears, earnestly beseeching him that he
			would go in and pray for the servant, because his life was of great
			moment to him; and he believed that if the bishop would lay his
			hand upon him and give him his blessing, he would soon mend. So the
			bishop went in, and saw him very near death, and by his side the
			coffin in which he was to be laid for his burial, whilst all
			mourned. He said a prayer and blessed him, and going out, spake the
			wonted words of comfort, <span class="tei tei-q">“Good health be
			yours and that speedily.”</span> Afterwards, when they were sitting
			at table, the servant sent to his lord, desiring that he would let
			him have a cup of wine, because he was thirsty. The thegn,
			rejoicing greatly that he could drink, sent him a cup of wine,
			blessed by the bishop; and, as soon as he had drunk it, he
			immediately got up, and, shaking off the heaviness of his
			infirmity, dressed himself and went forth, and going in to the
			bishop, saluted him and the other guests, saying <!--Page 309-->that he also would gladly eat and drink
			with them. They bade him sit down with them at table, greatly
			rejoicing at his recovery. He sat down, ate and drank and made
			merry, and behaved himself like the rest of the company; and living
			many years after, continued in the same health which he had gained.
			The aforesaid abbot says this miracle was not wrought in his
			presence, but that he had it from those who were present.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
