<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-4" id="chapter-4-32" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXXII</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">Of one who was lately cured of a disease in his eye at the relics of St. Cuthbert.</p>
			</header>
			<p>Nor is that cure
			to be passed over in silence, which was performed by his relics
			three years ago, and was told me lately by the brother himself, on
			whom it was wrought. It happened in the monastery, which, being
			built near the river Dacore,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-764" id="noteref-764" epub:type="noteref">764</a> has
			taken its name from the same, over which, at that time, the
			religious Suidbert<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-765" id="noteref-765" epub:type="noteref">765</a>
			presided as abbot. In that monastery was a youth whose eyelid was
			disfigured by an unsightly tumour, which growing daily greater,
			threatened the loss of the eye. The physicians endeavoured to
			mitigate it by applying ointments, but in vain. Some said it ought
			to be cut off; others opposed this course, for fear of greater
			danger. The brother having long laboured under this malady, when no
			human means availed to save his eye, but rather, it grew daily
			worse, on a sudden, through the grace of the <!--Page 300-->mercy of God, it came to pass that he
			was cured by the relics of the holy father, Cuthbert. For when the
			brethren found his body uncorrupted, after having been many years
			buried, they took some part of the hair, to give, as relics, to
			friends who asked for them, or to show, in testimony of the
			miracle.</p>
			<p>One of the
			priests of the monastery, named Thruidred, who is now abbot there,
			had a small part of these relics by him at that time. One day he
			went into the church and opened the box of relics, to give some
			part of them to a friend who asked for it, and it happened that the
			youth who had the diseased eye was then in the church. The priest,
			having given his friend as much as he thought fit, gave the rest to
			the youth to put back into its place. But he having received the
			hairs of the holy head, prompted by some salutary impulse, applied
			them to the diseased eyelid, and endeavoured for some time, by the
			application of them, to abate and mitigate the tumour. Having done
			this, he again laid the relics in the box, as he had been bidden,
			believing that his eye would soon be cured by the hairs of the man
			of God, which had touched it; nor did his faith disappoint him. It
			was then, as he is wont to relate, about the second hour of the
			day; but while he was occupied with other thoughts and business of
			the day, on a sudden, about the sixth hour of the same, touching
			his eye, he found it and the eyelid as sound as if there never had
			been any disfigurement or tumour on it.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
