<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-1" id="chapter-1-13" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">How in the reign of Theodosius the younger, in whose time Palladius was sent to the Scots that believed in Christ, the Britons begging assistance of Ætius, the consul, could not obtain it. [446 a.d.]</p>
			</header>
			<p>In the year of
			our Lord 423, Theodosius, the younger, the forty-fifth from
			Augustus, succeeded Honorius and governed the Roman empire
			twenty-six years. In the <!--Page 027-->
			eighth year of his reign,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-80" id="noteref-80" epub:type="noteref">80</a>
			Palladius was sent by Celestinus, the Roman pontiff, to the Scots
			that believed in Christ, to be their first bishop. In the
			twenty-third year of his reign, Aetius,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-81" id="noteref-81" epub:type="noteref">81</a> a man
			of note and a patrician, discharged his third consulship with
			Symmachus for his colleague. To him the wretched remnant of the
			Britons sent a letter, which began thus:—<span class="tei tei-q">“To Aetius, thrice Consul, the groans of the
			Britons.”</span> And in the sequel of the letter they thus unfolded
			their woes:—<span class="tei tei-q">“The barbarians drive us to the
			sea; the sea drives us back to the barbarians: between them we are
			exposed to two sorts of death; we are either slaughtered or
			drowned.”</span> Yet, for all this, they could not obtain any help
			from him, as he was then engaged in most serious wars with Bledla
			and Attila, kings of the Huns. And though the year before
			this<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-82" id="noteref-82" epub:type="noteref">82</a> Bledla
			had been murdered by the treachery of his own brother Attila, yet
			Attila himself remained so intolerable an enemy to the Republic,
			that he ravaged almost all Europe, attacking and destroying cities
			and castles. At the same time there was a famine at Constantinople,
			and soon after a plague followed; moreover, a great part of the
			wall of that city, with fifty-seven towers, fell to the ground.
			Many cities also went to ruin, and the famine and pestilential
			state of the air destroyed thousands of men and cattle.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
