<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2" id="chapter-2-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">Of the death of the blessed Pope Gregory.<a class="pginternal" href="#note_143" id="noteref_143"><span class="tei tei-noteref" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">143</span></span></a>[604 a.d.]</p>
			</header>
			<!--
			<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
			<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
			<head>
			<title>III</title>
			<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
			<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
			</head>
			<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
			<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<span style="font-size: 173%">Book II</span></h1>
			<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
			<a id="toc83"/> <a id="pdf84"/>
			<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_II_Chap_I"/>
			<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
			<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. I. Of the death of the blessed
			Pope Gregory.</span><a href="#note_143" id="noteref_143" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">143</span></span></a><span style="font-size: 144%">[604</span>
			<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At this time,
			that is, in the year of our Lord 605,<a href="#note_144" id="noteref_144" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">144</span></span></a> the
			blessed Pope Gregory, after having most gloriously governed the
			Roman Apostolic see thirteen years, six months, and ten days, died,
			and was translated to an eternal abode in the kingdom of Heaven. Of
			whom, seeing that by his zeal he converted our nation, the English,
			from the power of Satan to the faith of Christ, it behoves us to
			discourse more at large in our Ecclesiastical History, for we may
			rightly, nay, we must, call him our apostle; because, as soon as he
			began to wield the pontifical power over all the world, and was
			placed over the Churches long before converted to the true faith,
			he made our nation, till then enslaved to idols, the Church of
			Christ, so that concerning him we may use those words of the
			Apostle; <span class="tei tei-q">“if he be not an apostle to
			others, yet doubtless he is to us; for the seal of his apostleship
			are we in the Lord.”</span><a href="#note_145" id="noteref_145" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">145</span></span></a></p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He was by nation
			a Roman, son of Gordianus, tracing his descent from ancestors that
			were not only noble, but religious. Moreover Felix, once bishop of
			the same Apostolic see, a man of great honour in Christ and in the
			Church, was his forefather.<a href="#note_146" id="noteref_146" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">146</span></span></a> Nor
			did he show his <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page076">[pg
			076]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg076"/>
			nobility in religion by less strength of devotion than his parents
			and kindred. But that nobility of this world which was seen in him,
			by the help of the Divine Grace, he used only to gain the glory of
			eternal dignity; for soon quitting his secular habit, he entered a
			monastery, wherein he began to live with so much grace of
			perfection that (as he was wont afterwards with tears to testify)
			his mind was above all transitory things; that he rose superior to
			all that is subject to change; that he used to think of nothing but
			what was heavenly; that, whilst detained by the body, he broke
			through the bonds of the flesh by contemplation; and that he even
			loved death, which is a penalty to almost all men, as the entrance
			into life, and the reward of his labours. This he used to say of
			himself, not to boast of his progress in virtue, but rather to
			bewail the falling off which he imagined he had sustained through
			his pastoral charge. Indeed, once in a private conversation with
			his deacon, Peter, after having enumerated the former virtues of
			his soul, he added sorrowfully, <span class="tei tei-q">“But now,
			on account of the pastoral charge, it is entangled with the affairs
			of laymen, and, after so fair an appearance of inward peace, is
			defiled with the dust of earthly action. And having wasted itself
			on outward things, by turning aside to the affairs of many men,
			even when it desires the inward things, it returns to them
			undoubtedly impaired. I therefore consider what I endure, I
			consider what I have lost, and when I behold what I have thrown
			away, that which I bear appears the more grievous.”</span></p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">So spake the
			holy man constrained by his great humility. But it behoves us to
			believe that he lost nothing of his monastic perfection by reason
			of his pastoral charge, but rather that he gained greater profit
			through the labour of converting many, than by the former calm of
			his private life, and chiefly because, whilst holding the
			pontifical office, he set about organizing his house like a
			monastery. And when first drawn from the monastery, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page077">[pg 077]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg077"/> ordained to the ministry of the altar,
			and sent to Constantinople as representative<a href="#note_147" id="noteref_147" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">147</span></span></a> of
			the Apostolic see, though he now took part in the secular affairs
			of the palace, yet he did not abandon the fixed course of his
			heavenly life; for some of the brethren of his monastery, who had
			followed him to the royal city in their brotherly love, he employed
			for the better observance of monastic rule, to the end that at all
			times, by their example, as he writes himself, he might be held
			fast to the calm shore of prayer, as it were, with the cable of an
			anchor, whilst he should be tossed up and down by the ceaseless
			waves of worldly affairs; and daily in the intercourse of studious
			reading with them, strengthen his mind shaken with temporal
			concerns. By their company he was not only guarded against the
			assaults of the world, but more and more roused to the exercises of
			a heavenly life.</p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">For they
			persuaded him to interpret by a mystical exposition the book of the
			blessed Job,<a href="#note_148" id="noteref_148" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">148</span></span></a> which
			is involved in great obscurity; nor could he refuse to undertake
			that work, which brotherly affection imposed on him for the future
			benefit of many; but in a wonderful manner, in five and thirty
			books of exposition, he taught how that same book is to be
			understood literally; how to be referred to <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page078">[pg 078]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg078"/> the mysteries of Christ and the Church;
			and in what sense it is to be adapted to every one of the faithful.
			This work he began as papal representative in the royal city, but
			finished it at Rome after being made pope. Whilst he was still in
			the royal city, by the help of the grace of Catholic truth, he
			crushed in its first rise a new heresy which sprang up there,
			concerning the state of our resurrection. For Eutychius,<a href="#note_149" id="noteref_149" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">149</span></span></a>
			bishop of that city, taught, that our body, in the glory of
			resurrection, would be impalpable, and more subtile than wind and
			air. The blessed Gregory hearing this, proved by force of truth,
			and by the instance of the Resurrection of our Lord, that this
			doctrine was every way opposed to the orthodox faith. For the
			Catholic faith holds that our body, raised by the glory of
			immortality, is indeed rendered subtile by the effect of spiritual
			power, but is palpable by the reality of nature; according to the
			example of our Lord's Body, concerning which, when risen from the
			dead, He Himself says to His disciples, <span class="tei tei-q">“Handle Me and see, for a spirit hath not flesh and
			bones, as ye see Me have.”</span><a href="#note_150" id="noteref_150" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">150</span></span></a> In
			maintaining this faith, the venerable Father Gregory so earnestly
			strove against the rising heresy, and with the help of the most
			pious emperor, Tiberius Constantine,<a href="#note_151" id="noteref_151" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">151</span></span></a> so
			fully suppressed it, that none has been since found to revive
			it.</p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He likewise
			composed another notable book, the <span class="tei tei-q">“Liber
			Pastoralis,”</span> wherein he clearly showed what sort of persons
			ought to be preferred to rule the Church; how such rulers ought to
			live; with how much discrimination they ought to instruct the
			different classes of their hearers, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page079">[pg 079]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg079"/> and how seriously to reflect every day on
			their own frailty. He also wrote forty homilies on the Gospel,
			which he divided equally into two volumes; and composed four books
			of Dialogues, in which, at the request of his deacon, Peter, he
			recounted the virtues of the more renowned saints of Italy, whom he
			had either known or heard of, as a pattern of life for posterity;
			to the end that, as he taught in his books of Expositions what
			virtues men ought to strive after, so by describing the miracles of
			saints, he might make known the glory of those virtues. Further, in
			twenty-two homilies, he showed how much light is latent in the
			first and last parts of the prophet Ezekiel, which seemed the most
			obscure. Besides which, he wrote the <span class="tei tei-q">“Book
			of Answers,”</span><a href="#note_152" id="noteref_152" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">152</span></span></a> to
			the questions of the holy Augustine, the first bishop of the
			English nation, as we have shown above, inserting the same book
			entire in this history; and the useful little <span class="tei tei-q">“Synodical Book,”</span><a href="#note_153" id="noteref_153" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">153</span></span></a> which
			he composed with the bishops of Italy on necessary matters of the
			Church; as well as private letters to certain persons. And it is
			the more wonderful that he could write so many lengthy works,
			seeing that almost all the time of his youth, to use his own words,
			he was frequently tormented with internal pain, constantly
			enfeebled by the weakness of his digestion, and oppressed by a low
			but persistent fever. But in all these troubles, forasmuch as he
			carefully reflected that, as the Scripture testifies,<a href="#note_154" id="noteref_154" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">154</span></span></a>
			<span class="tei tei-q">“He scourgeth every son whom He
			receiveth,”</span> the more severely he suffered under those
			present evils, the more he assured himself of his eternal hope.</p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Thus much may be
			said of his immortal genius, which could not be crushed by such
			severe bodily pains. Other popes applied themselves to building
			churches or adorning them with gold and silver, but Gregory was
			wholly intent upon gaining souls. Whatsoever money he had,
			<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page080">[pg 080]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg080"/> he took care to
			distribute diligently and give to the poor, that his righteousness
			might endure for ever, and his horn be exalted with honour; so that
			the words of the blessed Job might be truly said of him,<a href="#note_155" id="noteref_155" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">155</span></span></a>
			<span class="tei tei-q">“When the ear heard me, then it blessed me;
			and when the eye saw me, it gave witness to me: because I delivered
			the poor that cried, and the fatherless, and him that had none to
			help him. The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon
			me, and I caused the widow's heart to sing for joy. I put on
			righteousness, and it clothed me; my judgement was as a robe and a
			diadem. I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I to the lame. I was
			a father to the poor; and the cause which I knew not, I searched
			out. And I brake the jaws of the wicked, and plucked the spoil out
			of his teeth.”</span> And a little after: <span class="tei tei-q">“If I have withheld,”</span> says he, <span class="tei tei-q">“the poor from their desire; or have caused the eyes of
			the widow to fail; or have eaten my morsel myself alone, and the
			fatherless hath not eaten thereof: (for from my youth compassion
			grew up with me, and from my mother's womb it came forth with
			me.”</span><a href="#note_156" id="noteref_156" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">156</span></span></a>)</p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">To his works of
			piety and righteousness this also may be added, that he saved our
			nation, by the preachers he sent hither, from the teeth of the old
			enemy, and made it partaker of eternal liberty. Rejoicing in the
			faith and salvation of our race, and worthily commending it with
			praise, he says, in his exposition of the blessed Job, <span class="tei tei-q">“Behold, the tongue of Britain, which only knew how to
			utter barbarous cries, has long since begun to raise the Hebrew
			Hallelujah to the praise of God! Behold, the once swelling ocean
			now serves prostrate at the feet of the saints; and its wild
			upheavals, which earthly princes could not subdue with the sword,
			are now, through the fear of God, bound by the lips of priests with
			words alone; and the heathen that stood not in awe of troops of
			warriors, now believes and fears the tongues of the humble! For he
			has received a message from on high <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page081">[pg 081]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg081"/> and mighty works are revealed; the strength
			of the knowledge of God is given him, and restrained by the fear of
			the Lord, he dreads to do evil, and with all his heart desires to
			attain to everlasting grace.”</span> In which words the blessed
			Gregory shows us this also, that St. Augustine and his companions
			brought the English to receive the truth, not only by the preaching
			of words, but also by showing forth heavenly signs.</p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The blessed Pope
			Gregory, among other things, caused Masses to be celebrated in the
			churches of the holy Apostles, Peter and Paul, over their bodies.
			And in the celebration of Masses, he added three petitions of the
			utmost perfection: <span class="tei tei-q">“And dispose our days in
			thy peace, and bid us to be preserved from eternal damnation, and
			to be numbered in the flock of thine elect.”</span><a href="#note_157" id="noteref_157" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">157</span></span></a></p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He governed the
			Church in the days of the Emperors Mauritius and Phocas, and
			passing out of this life in the second year of the same
			Phocas,<a href="#note_158" id="noteref_158" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">158</span></span></a> he
			departed to the true life which is in Heaven. His body was buried
			in the church of the blessed Apostle Peter before the sacristy, on
			the 12th day of March, to rise one day in the same body in glory
			with the rest of the holy pastors of the Church. On his tomb was
			written this epitaph:</p>
			<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
			<span style="font-size: 90%">Receive, O Earth, his body taken from
			thine own; thou canst restore it, when God calls to life. His
			spirit rises to the stars; the claims of death shall not avail
			against him, for death itself is but the way to new life. In this
			tomb are laid the limbs of a great pontiff, who yet lives for ever
			in all places in countless deeds of mercy. Hunger and cold he
			overcame with food and raiment, and shielded souls from the enemy
			by his holy teaching. And whatsoever he taught in word, that he
			fulfilled in deed, that he might be a pattern, even as he spake
			words of mystic meaning. By his</span> <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page082">[pg 082]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg082"/><span style="font-size: 90%">guiding love he
			brought the Angles to Christ, gaining armies for the Faith from a
			new people. This was thy toil, thy task, thy care, thy aim as
			shepherd, to offer to thy Lord abundant increase of the flock.
			So, Consul of God, rejoice in this thy triumph, for now thou hast
			the reward of thy works for evermore.</span>
			</div>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Nor must we pass
			by in silence the story of the blessed Gregory, handed down to us
			by the tradition of our ancestors, which explains his earnest care
			for the salvation of our nation. It is said that one day, when some
			merchants had lately arrived at Rome, many things were exposed for
			sale in the market place, and much people resorted thither to buy:
			Gregory himself went with the rest, and saw among other wares some
			boys put up for sale, of fair complexion, with pleasing
			countenances, and very beautiful hair. When he beheld them, he
			asked, it is said, from what region or country they were brought?
			and was told, from the island of Britain, and that the inhabitants
			were like that in appearance. He again inquired whether those
			islanders were Christians, or still involved in the errors of
			paganism, and was informed that they were pagans. Then fetching a
			deep sigh from the bottom of his heart, <span class="tei tei-q">“Alas! what pity,”</span> said he, <span class="tei tei-q">“that the author of darkness should own men of such
			fair countenances; and that with such grace of outward form, their
			minds should be void of inward grace.”</span> He therefore again
			asked, what was the name of that nation? and was answered, that
			they were called Angles. <span class="tei tei-q">“Right,”</span>
			said he, <span class="tei tei-q">“for they have an angelic face,
			and it is meet that such should be co-heirs with the Angels in
			heaven. What is the name of the province from which they are
			brought?”</span> It was replied, that the natives of that province
			were called Deiri.<a href="#note_159" id="noteref_159" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">159</span></span></a>
			<span class="tei tei-q">“Truly are they <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">De
			ira</span></span>,”</span> said he, <span class="tei tei-q">“saved
			from wrath, and called to the mercy of Christ. How is the king of
			that province <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page083">[pg
			083]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg083"/>
			called?”</span> They told him his name was Aelli;<a href="#note_160" id="noteref_160" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">160</span></span></a> and
			he, playing upon the name, said, <span class="tei tei-q">“Allelujah, the praise of God the Creator must be sung
			in those parts.”</span></p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Then he went to
			the bishop of the Roman Apostolic see<a href="#note_161" id="noteref_161" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">161</span></span></a> (for
			he was not himself then made pope), and entreated him to send some
			ministers of the Word into Britain to the nation of the English,
			that it might be converted to Christ by them; declaring himself
			ready to carry out that work with the help of God, if the Apostolic
			Pope should think fit to have it done. But not being then able to
			perform this task, because, though the Pope was willing to grant
			his request, yet the citizens of Rome could not be brought to
			consent that he should depart so far from the city, as soon as he
			was himself made Pope, he carried out the long-desired work,
			sending, indeed, other preachers, but himself by his exhortations
			and prayers helping the preaching to bear fruit. This account,
			which we have received from a past generation, we have thought fit
			to insert in our Ecclesiastical History.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
			<a id="toc85"/> <a id="pdf86"/>
			<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_II_Chap_II"/>
			-->
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
