<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-1" id="chapter-1-11" epub:type="chapter">
			<!--Page 022-->
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XI</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">How during the reign of Honorius, Gratian and Constantine were created tyrants in Britain; and soon after the former was slain in Britain, and the latter in Gaul.</p>
			</header>
			<p>In the year of
			our Lord 407,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-68" id="noteref-68" epub:type="noteref">68</a>
			Honorius, the younger son of Theodosius, and the forty-fourth from
			Augustus, being emperor, two years before the invasion of Rome by
			Alaric, king of the Goths, when the nations of the Alani, Suevi,
			Vandals, and many others with them, having defeated the Franks and
			passed the Rhine, ravaged all Gaul, Gratianus, a citizen of the
			country, was set up as tyrant in Britain and killed. In his place,
			Constantine, one of the meanest soldiers, only for the hope
			afforded by his name, and without any worth to recommend him, was
			chosen emperor. As soon as he had taken upon him the command, he
			crossed over into Gaul, where being often imposed upon by the
			barbarians with untrustworthy treaties, he did more harm than good
			to the Commonwealth.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-69" id="noteref-69" epub:type="noteref">69</a>
			Whereupon Count Constantius,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-70" id="noteref-70" epub:type="noteref">70</a> by the
			command of Honorius, marching into Gaul with an army, besieged him
			in the city of Arles, took him prisoner, and put him to death. His
			son Constans, a monk, whom he had created Caesar, was also put to
			death by his own follower Count Gerontius,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-71" id="noteref-71" epub:type="noteref">71</a> at
			Vienne.</p><!--Page 023-->
			<p>Rome was taken
			by the Goths, in the year from its foundation, 1164.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-72" id="noteref-72" epub:type="noteref">72</a> Then
			the Romans ceased to rule in Britain, almost 470 years after Caius
			Julius Caesar came to the island. They dwelt within the rampart,
			which, as we have mentioned, Severus made across the island, on the
			south side of it, as the cities, watch-towers,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-73" id="noteref-73" epub:type="noteref">73</a>
			bridges, and paved roads there made testify to this day; but they
			had a right of dominion over the farther parts of Britain, as also
			over the islands that are beyond Britain.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
