<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-4" id="chapter-4-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">How a little boy, dying in the same monastery, called upon a virgin that was to follow him; and how another nun, at the point of leaving her body, saw some small part of the future glory. [675 a.d.?]</p>
			</header>
			<p>There was, in
			the same monastery, a boy, not above three years old, called
			Aesica; who, by reason of his tender age, was being brought up
			among the virgins dedicated to God, there to learn his lessons.
			This child being seized by the aforesaid pestilence, when his last
			hour was come, called three times upon one of the virgins
			consecrated to Christ, speaking to her by her own name, as if she
			had been present, Eadgyth! Eadgyth! Eadgyth! and thus ending his
			temporal life, entered into that which is eternal. The virgin, to
			whom he called, as he was dying, was immediately seized, where she
			was, with the same sickness, and departing this life the same day
			on which she had been summoned, followed him that called her into
			the heavenly kingdom.</p>
			<p>Likewise, one of
			the same handmaids of God, being smitten with the same disease, and
			reduced to the last extremity, began on a sudden, about midnight,
			to cry out to them that ministered to her, desiring they would put
			out the lamp that was lighted there. And, when she had done this
			many times, and yet no one did her will, at last she said,
			<span class="tei tei-q">“I know that you think I am raving, when I
			say this, but be assured that it is not so; for I tell you truly,
			that I see this house filled with so great a light, that that lamp
			of yours seems to me to be altogether dark.”</span> And when still
			no one replied to what she said, or did her bidding, she added,
			<span class="tei tei-q">“Burn your lamp, then, as long as you will;
			but know, that it is not my light, for my light will come to me at
			the dawn of day.”</span> Then <!--Page 235-->she began to tell, that a certain man of God,
			who had died that same year, had appeared to her, telling her that
			at the break of day she should depart to the eternal light. The
			truth of which vision was speedily proved by the maiden's death as
			soon as the day appeared.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
