<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-3" id="chapter-3-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XII</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">How a little boy was cured of a fever at his tomb.</p>
			</header>
			<p>Some time after,
			there was a certain little boy in the said monastery, who had been
			long grievously troubled with <!--Page 160-->a fever; he was one day anxiously expecting
			the hour when his fit was to come on, when one of the brothers,
			coming in to him, said, <span class="tei tei-q">“Shall I tell you,
			my son, how you may be cured of this sickness? Rise, enter the
			church, and go close to Oswald's tomb; sit down and stay there
			quiet and do not leave it; do not come away, or stir from the
			place, till the time is past, when the fever leaves you: then I
			will go in and fetch you away.”</span> The boy did as he was
			advised, and the disease durst not assail him as he sat by the
			saint's tomb; but fled in such fear that it did not dare to touch
			him, either the second or third day, or ever after. The brother
			that came from thence, and told me this, added, that at the time
			when he was talking with me, the young man was then still living in
			the monastery, on whom, when a boy, that miracle of healing had
			been wrought. Nor need we wonder that the prayers of that king who
			is now reigning with our Lord, should be very efficacious with Him,
			since he, whilst yet governing his temporal kingdom, was always
			wont to pray and labour more for that which is eternal. Nay, it is
			said, that he often continued in prayer from the hour of morning
			thanksgiving<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-349" id="noteref-349" epub:type="noteref">349</a> till
			it was day; and that by reason of his constant custom of praying or
			giving thanks to God, he was wont always, wherever he sat, to hold
			his hands on his knees with the palms turned upwards. It is also
			commonly affirmed and has passed into a proverb, that he ended his
			life in prayer; for when he was beset with the weapons of his
			enemies, and perceived that death was at hand, he prayed for the
			souls of his army. Whence it is proverbially said, <span class="tei tei-q">“ <span class="tei tei-q">‘Lord have mercy on their
			souls,’</span> said Oswald, as he fell to the ground.”</span></p>
			<p>Now his bones
			were translated to the monastery which we have mentioned, and
			buried therein: but the king who slew him commanded his head, and
			hands, with the arms, to be cut off from the body, and set upon
			stakes. But his successor in the throne, Oswy, coming thither the
			next year with his army, took them down, and buried <!--Page 161-->his head in the cemetery of the church
			of Lindisfarne,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-350" id="noteref-350" epub:type="noteref">350</a> and
			the hands and arms in his royal city.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-351" id="noteref-351" epub:type="noteref">351</a></p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
