<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-1" id="chapter-1-26" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">How St. Augustine in Kent followed the doctrine and manner of life of the primitive Church, and settled his episcopal see in the royal city. [597 a.d.]</p>
			</header>
			<p>As soon as they
			entered the dwelling-place assigned to them, they began to imitate
			the Apostolic manner of life in the primitive Church; applying
			themselves to constant prayer, watchings, and fastings; preaching
			the Word of life to as many as they could; despising all worldly
			things, as in nowise concerning them; receiving only their
			necessary food from those they taught; living themselves in all
			respects conformably to what they taught, and being always ready to
			suffer any adversity, and even <!--Page 048-->to die for that truth which they preached. In
			brief, some believed and were baptized, admiring the simplicity of
			their blameless life, and the sweetness of their heavenly doctrine.
			There was on the east side of the city, a church dedicated of old
			to the honour of St. Martin,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-117" id="noteref-117" epub:type="noteref">117</a> built
			whilst the Romans were still in the island, wherein the queen, who,
			as has been said before, was a Christian, was wont to pray. In this
			they also first began to come together, to chant the Psalms, to
			pray, to celebrate Mass, to preach, and to baptize, till when the
			king had been converted to the faith, they obtained greater liberty
			to preach everywhere and build or repair churches.</p>
			<p>When he, among
			the rest, believed and was baptized, attracted by the pure life of
			these holy men and their gracious promises, the truth of which they
			established by many miracles, greater numbers began daily to flock
			together to hear the Word, and, forsaking their heathen rites, to
			have fellowship, through faith, in the unity of Christ's Holy
			Church. It is told that the king, while he rejoiced at their
			conversion and their faith, yet compelled none to embrace
			Christianity, but only showed more affection to the believers, as
			to his fellow citizens in the kingdom of Heaven. For he had learned
			from those who had instructed him and guided him to salvation, that
			the service of Christ ought to be voluntary, not by compulsion. Nor
			was it long before he gave his teachers a settled residence suited
			to their degree in his metropolis of Canterbury, with such
			possessions of divers sorts as were necessary for them.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
