<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-4" id="chapter-4-18" epub:type="chapter">
			<!--Page 257-->
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">Of John, the precentor of the Apostolic see, who came into Britain to teach. [680 a.d.]</p>
			</header>
			<p>Among those who
			were present at this synod, and confirmed the decrees of the
			Catholic faith, was the venerable John,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-652" id="noteref-652" epub:type="noteref">652</a>
			archchanter of the church of the holy Apostle Peter,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-653" id="noteref-653" epub:type="noteref">653</a> and
			abbot of the monastery of the blessed Martin, who had come lately
			from Rome, by order of Pope Agatho, together with the most reverend
			Abbot Biscop, surnamed Benedict,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-654" id="noteref-654" epub:type="noteref">654</a> of
			whom mention has been made above. For the said Benedict, having
			built a monastery in Britain, in honour of the most blessed chief
			of the Apostles, at the mouth of the river Wear, went to Rome with
			Ceolfrid,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-655" id="noteref-655" epub:type="noteref">655</a> his
			companion and fellow-labourer in that work, who was after him abbot
			of the same monastery; he had been several times before at Rome,
			and was now honourably received by Pope Agatho of blessed memory;
			from whom he also asked and obtained, in order to <!--Page 258-->secure the immunities of the monastery
			which he had founded, a letter of privilege confirmed by apostolic
			authority, according to what he knew to be the will and grant of
			King Egfrid, by whose consent and gift of land he had built that
			monastery.</p>
			<p>He was also
			allowed to take the aforesaid Abbot John with him into Britain,
			that he might teach in his monastery the system of singing
			throughout the year, as it was practised at St. Peter's at
			Rome.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-656" id="noteref-656" epub:type="noteref">656</a> The
			Abbot John did as he had been commanded by the Pope, teaching the
			singers of the said monastery the order and manner of singing and
			reading aloud, and committing to writing all that was requisite
			throughout the whole course of the year for the celebration of
			festivals; and these writings are still preserved in that
			monastery, and have been copied by many others elsewhere. The said
			John not only taught the brothers of that monastery, but such as
			had skill in singing resorted from almost all the monasteries of
			the same province to hear him, and many invited him to teach in
			other places.</p>
			<p>Besides his task
			of singing and reading, he had also received a commission from the
			Apostolic Pope, carefully to inform himself concerning the faith of
			the English Church, and to give an account thereof on his return to
			Rome. For he also brought with him the decision of the synod of the
			blessed Pope Martin, held not long before at Rome,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-657" id="noteref-657" epub:type="noteref">657</a> with
			the consent of one hundred and five bishops, chiefly to refute
			those who taught that there is but one operation and will in
			Christ, and he gave it to be transcribed in the aforesaid monastery
			of the most religious Abbot Benedict. The men who followed such
			opinion greatly perplexed the faith of the Church of Constantinople
			at that time; but by the help of God they were then discovered and
			overcome.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-658" id="noteref-658" epub:type="noteref">658</a>
			Wherefore, Pope Agatho, being desirous to be informed concerning
			the state of the Church in Britain, as well as in other provinces,
			and to <!--Page 259-->
			what extent it was clear from the contagion of heretics, gave this
			matter in charge to the most reverend Abbot John, then appointed to
			go to Britain. The synod we have spoken of having been called for
			this purpose in Britain, the Catholic faith was found untainted in
			all, and a report of the proceedings of the same was given him to
			carry to Rome.</p>
			<p>But in his
			return to his own country, soon after crossing the sea, he fell
			sick and died; and his body, for the sake of St. Martin, in whose
			monastery he presided, was by his friends carried to Tours,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-659" id="noteref-659" epub:type="noteref">659</a> and
			honourably buried; for he had been kindly entertained by the Church
			there on his way to Britain, and earnestly entreated by the
			brethren, that in his return to Rome he would take that road, and
			visit their Church, and moreover he was there supplied with men to
			conduct him on his way, and assist him in the work enjoined upon
			him. Though he died by the way, yet the testimony of the Catholic
			faith of the English nation was carried to Rome, and received with
			great joy by the Apostolic Pope, and all those that heard or read
			it.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
