<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-3" id="chapter-3-19" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">How Fursa built a monastery among the East Angles, and of his visions and sanctity, to which, his flesh remaining uncorrupted after death bore testimony. [Circ. 633 a.d.]</p>
			</header>
			<p>Whilst Sigbert
			still governed the kingdom, there came out of Ireland a holy man
			called Fursa,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-379" id="noteref-379" epub:type="noteref">379</a>
			renowned both for his words and actions, and remarkable for
			singular virtues, being desirous to live as a stranger and pilgrim
			for the Lord's sake, wherever an opportunity should offer. On
			coming into the province of the East Angles, he was honourably
			received by the aforesaid king, and performing his wonted task of
			preaching the Gospel, by the example of his virtue and the
			influence of his words, converted many unbelievers to Christ, and
			confirmed in the faith and love of Christ those that already
			believed.</p>
			<p>Here he fell
			into some infirmity of body, and was thought worthy to see a vision
			of angels; in which he was admonished diligently to persevere in
			the ministry of the Word which he had undertaken, and indefatigably
			to apply himself to his usual watching and prayers; inasmuch as his
			end was certain, but the hour thereof uncertain, according to the
			saying of our Lord, <span class="tei tei-q">“Watch therefore, for
			ye know neither the day nor the hour.”</span><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-380" id="noteref-380" epub:type="noteref">380</a> Being
			confirmed by this vision, he set himself with all speed to build a
			monastery on the ground which had been given him by King Sigbert,
			and to establish a rule <!--Page 174-->
			of life therein. This monastery was pleasantly situated in the
			woods, near the sea; it was built within the area of a fort, which
			in the English language is called Cnobheresburg, that is,
			Cnobhere's Town;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-381" id="noteref-381" epub:type="noteref">381</a>
			afterwards, Anna, king of that province, and certain of the nobles,
			embellished it with more stately buildings and with gifts.</p>
			<p>This man was of
			noble Scottish<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-382" id="noteref-382" epub:type="noteref">382</a>
			blood, but much more noble in mind than in birth. From his boyish
			years, he had earnestly applied himself to reading sacred books and
			observing monastic discipline, and, as is most fitting for holy
			men, he carefully practised all that he learned to be right.</p>
			<p>Now, in course
			of time he himself built a monastery,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-383" id="noteref-383" epub:type="noteref">383</a>
			wherein he might with more freedom devote himself to his heavenly
			studies. There, falling sick, as the book concerning his life
			clearly informs us, he fell into a trance, and quitting his body
			from the evening till cockcrow, he was accounted worthy to behold
			the sight of the choirs of angels, and to hear their glad songs of
			praise. He was wont to declare, that among other things he
			distinctly heard this refrain: <span class="tei tei-q">“The saints
			shall go from strength to strength.”</span><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-384" id="noteref-384" epub:type="noteref">384</a> And
			again, <span class="tei tei-q">“The God of gods shall be seen in
			Sion.”</span><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-385" id="noteref-385" epub:type="noteref">385</a> Being
			restored to his body, and again taken from it three days after, he
			not only saw the greater joys of the blessed, but also fierce
			conflicts of evil spirits, who by frequent accusations wickedly
			endeavoured to obstruct his journey to heaven; but the angels
			protected him, and all their endeavours were in vain. Concerning
			all these matters, if any one desires to be more fully informed, to
			wit, with what subtlety of deceit the devils recounted both his
			actions and idle words, and even his thoughts, as if they had been
			written down in a book; <!--Page 175-->
			and what joyous or grievous tidings he learned from the holy angels
			and just men who appeared to him among the angels; let him read the
			little book of his life which I have mentioned, and I doubt not
			that he will thereby reap much spiritual profit.</p>
			<p>But there is one
			thing among the rest, which we have thought it may be beneficial to
			many to insert in this history. When he had been taken up on high,
			he was bidden by the angels that conducted him to look back upon
			the world. Upon which, casting his eyes downward, he saw, as it
			were, a dark valley in the depths underneath him. He also saw four
			fires in the air, not far distant from each other. Then asking the
			angels, what fires those were, he was told, they were the fires
			which would kindle and consume the world. One of them was of
			falsehood, when we do not fulfil that which we promised in Baptism,
			to renounce the Devil and all his works. The next was of
			covetousness, when we prefer the riches of the world to the love of
			heavenly things. The third was of discord, when we do not fear to
			offend our neighbour even in needless things. The fourth was of
			ruthlessness when we think it a light thing to rob and to defraud
			the weak. These fires, increasing by degrees, extended so as to
			meet one another, and united in one immense flame. When it drew
			near, fearing for himself, he said to the angel, <span class="tei tei-q">“Lord, behold the fire draws near to me.”</span> The
			angel answered, <span class="tei tei-q">“That which you did not
			kindle will not burn you; for though this appears to be a terrible
			and great pyre, yet it tries every man according to the merits of
			his works; for every man's concupiscence shall burn in this fire;
			for as a man burns in the body through unlawful pleasure, so, when
			set free from the body, he shall burn by the punishment which he
			has deserved.”</span></p>
			<p>Then he saw one
			of the three angels, who had been his guides throughout both
			visions, go before and divide the flaming fires, whilst the other
			two, flying about on both sides, defended him from the danger of
			the fire. He also saw devils flying through the fire, raising the
			flames of war against the just. Then followed <!--Page 176-->accusations of the envious spirits
			against himself, the defence of the good spirits, and a fuller
			vision of the heavenly hosts; as also of holy men of his own
			nation, who, as he had learnt, had worthily held the office of
			priesthood in old times, and who were known to fame; from whom he
			heard many things very salutary to himself, and to all others that
			would listen to them. When they had ended their discourse, and
			returned to Heaven with the angelic spirits, there remained with
			the blessed Fursa, the three angels of whom we have spoken before,
			and who were to bring him back to the body. And when they
			approached the aforesaid great fire, the angel divided the flame,
			as he had done before; but when the man of God came to the passage
			so opened amidst the flames, the unclean spirits, laying hold of
			one of those whom they were burning in the fire, cast him against
			him, and, touching his shoulder and jaw, scorched them. He knew the
			man, and called to mind that he had received his garment when he
			died. The holy angel, immediately laying hold of the man, threw him
			back into the fire, and the malignant enemy said, <span class="tei tei-q">“Do not reject him whom you before received; for as you
			received the goods of the sinner, so you ought to share in his
			punishment.”</span> But the angel withstood him, saying,
			<span class="tei tei-q">“He did not receive them through avarice,
			but in order to save his soul.”</span> The fire ceased, and the
			angel, turning to him, said, <span class="tei tei-q">“That which
			you kindled burned you; for if you had not received the money of
			this man that died in his sins, his punishment would not burn
			you.”</span> And he went on to speak with wholesome counsel of what
			ought to be done for the salvation of such as repented in the hour
			of death.</p>
			<p>Being afterwards
			restored to the body, throughout the whole course of his life he
			bore the mark of the fire which he had felt in the spirit, visible
			to all men on his shoulder and jaw; and the flesh openly showed, in
			a wonderful manner, what the spirit had suffered in secret. He
			always took care, as he had done before, to teach all men the
			practice of virtue, as well by his example, as by preaching. But as
			for the story of his visions, he <!--Page 177-->would only relate them to those who, from
			desire of repentance, questioned him about them. An aged brother of
			our monastery is still living, who is wont to relate that a very
			truthful and religious man told him, that he had seen Fursa himself
			in the province of the East Angles, and heard those visions from
			his lips; adding, that though it was in severe winter weather and a
			hard frost, and the man was sitting in a thin garment when he told
			the story, yet he sweated as if it had been in the heat of
			mid-summer, by reason of the great terror or joy of which he
			spoke.</p>
			<p>To return to
			what we were saying before, when, after preaching the Word of God
			many years in Scotland,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-386" id="noteref-386" epub:type="noteref">386</a> he
			could not well endure the disturbance of the crowds that resorted
			to him, leaving all that he looked upon as his own, he departed
			from his native island, and came with a few brothers through the
			Britons into the province of the English, and preaching the Word
			there, as has been said, built a famous monastery.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-387" id="noteref-387" epub:type="noteref">387</a> When
			this was duly carried out, he became desirous to rid himself of all
			business of this world, and even of the monastery itself, and
			forthwith left the care of it and of its souls, to his brother
			Fullan, and the priests Gobban and Dicull,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-388" id="noteref-388" epub:type="noteref">388</a> and
			being himself free from all worldly affairs, resolved to end his
			life as a hermit. He had another brother called Ultan, who, after a
			long monastic probation, had also adopted the life of an anchorite.
			So, seeking him out alone, he lived a whole year with him in
			self-denial and prayer, and laboured daily with his hands.</p>
			<p>Afterwards
			seeing the province thrown into confusion by the irruptions of the
			pagans,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-389" id="noteref-389" epub:type="noteref">389</a> and
			foreseeing that the <!--Page 178-->
			monasteries would also be in danger, he left all things in order,
			and sailed over into Gaul, and being there honourably entertained
			by Clovis, king of the Franks,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-390" id="noteref-390" epub:type="noteref">390</a> or by
			the patrician Ercinwald, he built a monastery in the place called
			Latineacum,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-391" id="noteref-391" epub:type="noteref">391</a> and
			falling sick not long after, departed this life. The same
			Ercinwald, the patrician, took his body, and kept it in the porch
			of a church he was building in his town of Perrona,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-392" id="noteref-392" epub:type="noteref">392</a> till
			the church itself should be dedicated. This happened twenty-seven
			days after, and the body being taken from the porch, to be
			re-buried near the altar, was found as whole as if he had died that
			very hour. And again, four years after, when a more beautiful
			shrine had been built to receive his body to the east of the altar,
			it was still found without taint of corruption, and was translated
			thither with due honour; where it is well known that his merits,
			through the divine operation, have been declared by many miracles.
			We have briefly touched upon these matters as well as the
			incorruption of his body, that the lofty nature of the man may be
			better known to our readers. All which, as also concerning the
			comrades of his warfare, whosoever will read it, will find more
			fully described in the book of his life.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
