<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-5" id="chapter-5-14" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">How another in like manner, being at the point of death, saw the place of punishment appointed for him in Hell.</p>
			</header>
			<p>I myself knew a
			brother, would to God I had not known him, whose name I could
			mention if it were of any avail, dwelling in a famous monastery,
			but himself living infamously. He was oftentimes rebuked by the
			brethren and elders of the place, and admonished to be converted to
			a more chastened life; and though he would not give ear to them,
			they bore with him long and patiently, <!--Page 335-->on account of their need of his outward
			service, for he was a cunning artificer. But he was much given to
			drunkenness, and other pleasures of a careless life, and more used
			to stop in his workshop day and night, than to go to church to sing
			and pray and hear the Word of life with the brethren. For which
			reason it befell him according to the saying, that he who will not
			willingly humble himself and enter the gate of the church must
			needs be led against his will into the gate of Hell, being damned.
			For he falling sick, and being brought to extremity, called the
			brethren, and with much lamentation, like one damned, began to tell
			them, that he saw Hell opened, and Satan sunk in the depths
			thereof; and Caiaphas, with the others that slew our Lord, hard by
			him, delivered up to avenging flames. <span class="tei tei-q">“In
			whose neighbourhood,”</span> said he, <span class="tei tei-q">“I
			see a place of eternal perdition prepared for me, miserable wretch
			that I am.”</span> The brothers, hearing these words, began
			diligently to exhort him, that he should repent even then, whilst
			he was still in the flesh. He answered in despair, <span class="tei tei-q">“There is no time for me now to change my course of
			life, when I have myself seen my judgement passed.”</span></p>
			<p>Whilst uttering
			these words, he died without having received the saving Viaticum,
			and his body was buried in the farthest parts of the monastery, nor
			did any one dare either to say Masses or sing psalms, or even to
			pray for him.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-850" id="noteref-850" epub:type="noteref">850</a> Oh
			how far asunder hath God put light from darkness! The blessed
			Stephen, the first martyr, being about to suffer death for the
			truth, saw the heavens opened, and the glory of God, and Jesus
			standing on the right hand of God;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-851" id="noteref-851" epub:type="noteref">851</a> and
			where he was to be after death, there he fixed the eyes of his
			mind, that he might die the more joyfully. But this workman, of
			darkened mind and life, when death was at hand, saw Hell opened,
			and witnessed the damnation of the Devil and his followers; he saw
			also, unhappy wretch! his own prison among them, to the end that,
			despairing of salvation, he might himself die the more miserably,
			but might by his perdition <!--Page 336-->afford cause of salvation to the living who
			should hear of it. This befell of late in the province of the
			Bernicians, and being noised abroad far and near, inclined many to
			do penance for their sins without delay. Would to God that this
			also might come to pass through the reading of our words!</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
