<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-5" id="chapter-5-21" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">How the Abbot Ceolfrid sent master-builders to the King of the Picts to build a church, and with them an epistle concerning the Catholic Easter and the Tonsure. [710 a.d.]</p>
			</header>
			<!--
			<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
			<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XXI. How the Abbot Ceolfrid
			sent master-builders to the King of the Picts to build a church,
			and with them an epistle concerning the Catholic Easter and the
			Tonsure. [710</span> <span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At that
			time,<a href="#note_945" id="noteref_945" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">945</span></span></a>
			Naiton, King of the Picts, who inhabit the northern parts of
			Britain, taught by frequent meditation on the ecclesiastical
			writings, renounced the error whereby he and his nation had been
			holden till then, touching the observance of Easter, and brought
			himself and all his people to celebrate the catholic time of our
			Lord's Resurrection. To the end that he might bring this to pass
			with the more ease and greater authority, he sought aid from the
			English, whom he knew to have long since framed their religion
			after the example of the holy Roman Apostolic Church. Accordingly,
			he sent messengers to the venerable Ceolfrid,<a href="#note_946" id="noteref_946" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">946</span></span></a> abbot
			of the monastery of the blessed Apostles, Peter and Paul, which
			stands at the mouth of the river Wear, and near the river Tyne, at
			the place called Ingyruum,<a href="#note_947" id="noteref_947" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">947</span></span></a> which
			he gloriously governed after Benedict,<a href="#note_948" id="noteref_948" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">948</span></span></a> of
			whom we have before spoken; desiring, that he would send him a
			letter of exhortation, by the help of which he might the better
			confute those that presumed to keep Easter out of the due time; as
			also concerning the form and manner of tonsure whereby the clergy
			should be distinguished,<a href="#note_949" id="noteref_949" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">949</span></span></a>
			notwithstanding that he himself had no small knowledge of these
			things. He also prayed to have master-builders sent him to build a
			church of stone in his nation after <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page360">[pg 360]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg360"/> the Roman manner,<a href="#note_950" id="noteref_950" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">950</span></span></a>
			promising to dedicate the same in honour of the blessed chief of
			the Apostles. Moreover, he and all his people, he said, would
			always follow the custom of the holy Roman Apostolic Church, in so
			far as men so distant from the speech and nation of the Romans
			could learn it. The most reverend Abbot Ceolfrid favourably
			receiving his godly desires and requests, sent the builders he
			desired, and likewise the following letter:<a href="#note_951" id="noteref_951" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">951</span></span></a></p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">To the most excellent lord, and glorious King
			Naiton, Abbot Ceolfrid, greeting in the Lord.</span></span> We most
			readily and willingly endeavour, according to your desire, to make
			known to you the catholic observance of holy Easter, according to
			what we have learned of the Apostolic see, even as you, most devout
			king, in your godly zeal, have requested of us. For we know, that
			whensoever the lords of this world labour to learn, and to teach
			and to guard the truth, it is a gift of God to his Holy Church. For
			a certain profane writer<a href="#note_952" id="noteref_952" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">952</span></span></a> has
			most truly said, that the world would be most happy if either kings
			were philosophers, or philosophers were kings. Now if a man of this
			world could judge truly of the philosophy of this world, and form a
			right choice concerning the state of this world, how much more is
			it to be desired, and most earnestly to be prayed for by such as
			are citizens of the heavenly country, and strangers and pilgrims in
			this world, that the more powerful any are in the world the more
			they may strive to hearken to the commands of Him who is the
			Supreme Judge, and by their example and authority may teach those
			that are committed to their charge, to keep the same, together with
			themselves.</span></p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“There are then three rules given in the Sacred
			Writings, whereby the time of keeping Easter has been appointed for
			us and may in no wise be changed by any authority of man; two
			whereof are divinely established <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page361">[pg 361]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg361"/> in the law of Moses; the third is added in
			the Gospel by reason of the Passion and Resurrection of our Lord.
			For the law enjoined, that the Passover should be kept in the first
			month of the year, and the third week of that month, that is, from
			the fifteenth day to the one-and-twentieth. It is added, by
			Apostolic institution, from the Gospel, that we are to wait for the
			Lord's day in that third week, and to keep the beginning of the
			Paschal season on the same. Which threefold rule whosoever shall
			rightly observe, will never err in fixing the Paschal feast. But if
			you desire to be more plainly and fully informed in all these
			particulars, it is written in Exodus, where the people of Israel,
			being about to be delivered out of Egypt, are commanded to keep the
			first Passover,<a href="#note_953" id="noteref_953" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">953</span></span></a> that
			the Lord spake unto Moses and Aaron, saying, <span class="tei tei-q">‘This month shall be unto you the beginning of months;
			it shall be the first month of the year to you. Speak ye unto all
			the congregation of Israel, saying, In the tenth day of this month
			they shall take to them every man a lamb, according to the house of
			their fathers, a lamb for an house.’</span> And a little
			after,<a href="#note_954" id="noteref_954" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">954</span></span></a>
			<span class="tei tei-q">‘And ye shall keep it up until the
			fourteenth day of the same month; and the whole assembly of the
			congregation of Israel shall kill it in the evening.’</span> By
			which words it most plainly appears, that in the Paschal
			observance, though mention is made of the fourteenth day, yet it is
			not commanded that the Passover be kept on that day; but on the
			evening of the fourteenth day, that is, when the fifteenth moon,
			which is the beginning of the third week, appears in the sky, it is
			commanded that the lamb be killed; and that it was the night of the
			fifteenth moon, when the Egyptians were smitten and Israel was
			redeemed from long captivity. He says,<a href="#note_955" id="noteref_955" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">955</span></span></a>
			<span class="tei tei-q">‘Seven days shall ye eat unleavened
			bread.’</span> By which words all the third week of that same first
			month is appointed to be a solemn feast. But lest we should think
			that those same seven days were to be reckoned from the fourteenth
			to the twentieth, He forthwith <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page362">[pg 362]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg362"/> adds,<a href="#note_956" id="noteref_956" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">956</span></span></a>
			<span class="tei tei-q">‘Even the first day ye shall put away
			leaven out of your houses; for whosoever eateth leavened bread,
			from the first day until the seventh day, that soul shall be cut
			off from Israel;’</span> and so on, till he says,<a href="#note_957" id="noteref_957" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">957</span></span></a>
			<span class="tei tei-q">‘For in this selfsame day I will bring your
			army out of the land of Egypt.’</span></span></p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Thus he calls that the first day of unleavened bread,
			in which he was to bring their army out of Egypt. Now it is
			evident, that they were not brought out of Egypt on the fourteenth
			day, in the evening whereof the lamb was killed, and which is
			properly called the Passover or Phase, but on the fifteenth day, as
			is most plainly written in the book of Numbers:<a href="#note_958" id="noteref_958" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">958</span></span></a>
			<span class="tei tei-q">‘and they departed from Rameses on the
			fifteenth day of the first month, on the morrow after the Passover
			the Israelites went out with an high hand.’</span> Thus the seven
			days of unleavened bread, on the first whereof the people of the
			Lord were brought out of Egypt, are to be reckoned from the
			beginning of the third week, as has been said, that is, from the
			fifteenth day of the first month, till the end of the
			one-and-twentieth of the same month. But the fourteenth day is
			named apart from this number, by the title of the Passover, as is
			plainly shown by that which follows in Exodus:<a href="#note_959" id="noteref_959" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">959</span></span></a>
			where, after it is said, <span class="tei tei-q">‘For in this
			self-same day I will bring your army out of the land of
			Egypt;’</span> it is forthwith added, <span class="tei tei-q">‘And
			ye shall observe this day in your generations by an ordinance for
			ever. In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month, ye
			shall eat unleavened bread, until the one-and-twentieth day of the
			month at even. Seven days shall there be no leaven found in your
			houses.’</span> Now, who is there that does not perceive, that
			there are not only seven days, but rather eight, from the
			fourteenth to the one-and-twentieth, if the fourteenth be also
			reckoned in the number? But if, as appears by diligent study of the
			truth of the Scriptures, we reckon from the evening of the
			fourteenth day to the evening of the one-and-twentieth, we shall
			certainly <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page363">[pg
			363]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg363"/>
			find, that, while the Paschal feast begins on the evening of the
			fourteenth day, yet the whole sacred solemnity contains no more
			than only seven nights and as many days. Wherefore the rule which
			we laid down is proved to be true, when we said that the Paschal
			season is to be celebrated in the first month of the year, and the
			third week of the same. For it is in truth the third week, because
			it begins on the evening of the fourteenth day, and ends on the
			evening of the one-and-twentieth.</span></p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But since Christ our Passover is sacrificed,<a href="#note_960" id="noteref_960" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">960</span></span></a> and
			has made the Lord's day, which among the ancients was called the
			first day of the week, a solemn day to us for the joy of His
			Resurrection, the Apostolic tradition has included it in the
			Paschal festival; yet has decreed that the time of the legal
			Passover be in no wise anticipated or diminished; but rather
			ordains, that according to the precept of the law, that same first
			month of the year, and the fourteenth day of the same, and the
			evening thereof be awaited. And when this day should chance to fall
			on a Saturday, every man should take to him a lamb, according to
			the house of his fathers, a lamb for an house, and he should kill
			it in the evening, that is, that all the Churches throughout the
			world, making one Catholic Church, should provide Bread and Wine
			for the Mystery of the Flesh and Blood of the spotless Lamb
			<span class="tei tei-q">‘that hath taken away the sins of the
			world;’</span><a href="#note_961" id="noteref_961" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">961</span></span></a> and
			after a fitting solemn service of lessons and prayers and Paschal
			ceremonies, they should offer up these to the Lord, in hope of
			redemption to come. For this is that same night in which the people
			of Israel were delivered out of Egypt by the blood of the lamb;
			this is the same in which all the people of God were, by Christ's
			Resurrection, set free from eternal death. Then, in the morning,
			when the Lord's day dawns, they should celebrate the first day of
			the Paschal festival; for that is the day on which our Lord made
			known the glory of His Resurrection to His disciples, to their
			manifold joy at the merciful revelation. <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page364">[pg 364]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg364"/> The same is the first day of unleavened
			bread, concerning which it is plainly written in Leviticus,<a href="#note_962" id="noteref_962" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">962</span></span></a>
			<span class="tei tei-q">‘In the fourteenth day of the first month,
			at even, is the Lord's Passover. And on the fifteenth day of the
			same month is the feast of unleavened bread unto the Lord; seven
			days ye must eat unleavened bread. In the first day ye shall have
			an holy convocation.’</span></span></p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“If therefore it could be that the Lord's day should
			always happen on the fifteenth day of the first month, that is, on
			the fifteenth moon, we might always celebrate the Passover at one
			and the same time with the ancient people of God, though the nature
			of the mystery be different, as we do it with one and the same
			faith. But inasmuch as the day of the week does not keep pace
			exactly with the moon, the Apostolic tradition, which was preached
			at Rome by the blessed Peter, and confirmed at Alexandria by Mark
			the Evangelist,<a href="#note_963" id="noteref_963" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">963</span></span></a> his
			interpreter, appointed that when the first month was come, and in
			it the evening of the fourteenth day, we should also wait for the
			Lord's day, between the fifteenth and the one-and-twentieth day of
			the same month. For on whichever of those days it shall fall,
			Easter will be rightly kept on the same; seeing that it is one of
			those seven days on which the feast of unleavened bread is
			commanded to be kept. Thus it comes to pass that our Easter never
			falls either before or after the third week of the first month, but
			has for its observance either the whole of it, to wit, the seven
			days of unleavened bread appointed by the law, or at least some of
			them. For though it comprises but one of them, that is, the
			seventh, which the Scripture so highly commends, saying,<a href="#note_964" id="noteref_964" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">964</span></span></a>
			<span class="tei tei-q">‘But the seventh day shall be a more holy
			convocation, ye shall do no servile work therein,’</span> none can
			lay it to our charge, that we do not rightly keep Easter Sunday,
			which we received <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page365">[pg
			365]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg365"/>
			from the Gospel, in the third week of the first month, as the Law
			prescribes.</span></p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“The catholic reason of this observance being thus
			explained, the unreasonable error, on the other hand, of those who,
			without any necessity, presume either to anticipate, or to go
			beyond the term appointed in the Law, is manifest. For they that
			think Easter Sunday is to be observed from the fourteenth day of
			the first month till the twentieth moon, anticipate the time
			prescribed in the law, without any necessary reason; for when they
			begin to celebrate the vigil of the holy night from the evening of
			the thirteenth day, it is plain that they make that day the
			beginning of their Easter, whereof they find no mention in the
			commandment of the Law; and when they avoid celebrating our Lord's
			Easter on the one-and-twentieth day of the month, it is surely
			manifest that they wholly exclude that day from their solemnity,
			which the Law many times commends to be observed as a greater
			festival than the rest; and thus, perverting the proper order, they
			sometimes keep Easter Day entirely in the second week, and never
			place it on the seventh day of the third week. And again, they who
			think that Easter is to be kept from the sixteenth day of the said
			month till the two-and-twentieth<a href="#note_965" id="noteref_965" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">965</span></span></a> no
			less erroneously, though on the other side, deviate from the right
			way of truth, and as it were avoiding shipwreck on Scylla, they
			fall into the whirlpool of Charybdis to be drowned. For when they
			teach that Easter is to be begun at the rising of the sixteenth
			moon of the first month, that is, from the evening of the fifteenth
			day, it is certain that they altogether exclude from their
			solemnity the fourteenth day of the same month, which the Law first
			and chiefly commends; so that they scarce touch the evening of the
			fifteenth day, on which the people of God were redeemed from
			Egyptian bondage, and on which our Lord, by His Blood, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page366">[pg 366]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg366"/> rescued the world from the darkness of
			sin, and on which being also buried, He gave us the hope of a
			blessed rest after death.</span></p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And these men, receiving in themselves the recompense
			of their error, when they place Easter Sunday on the twenty-second
			day of the month, openly transgress and do violence to the term of
			Easter appointed by the Law, seeing that they begin Easter on the
			evening of that day in which the Law commanded it to be completed
			and brought to an end; and appoint that to be the first day of
			Easter, whereof no mention is any where found in the Law, to wit,
			the first of the fourth week. And both sorts are mistaken, not only
			in fixing and computing the moon's age, but also sometimes in
			finding the first month; but this controversy is longer than can be
			or ought to be contained in this letter. I will only say thus much,
			that by the vernal equinox, it may always be found, without the
			chance of an error, which must be the first month of the year,
			according to the lunar computation, and which the last. But the
			equinox, according to the opinion of all the Eastern nations, and
			particularly of the Egyptians,<a href="#note_966" id="noteref_966" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">966</span></span></a> who
			surpass all other learned men in calculation, falls on the
			twenty-first day of March, as we also prove by horological
			observation. Whatsoever moon therefore is at the full before the
			equinox, being on the fourteenth or fifteenth day, the same belongs
			to the last month of the foregoing year, and consequently is not
			meet for the celebration of Easter; but that moon which is full
			after the equinox, or at the very time of the equinox, belongs to
			the first month, and on that day, without a doubt, we must
			understand that the ancients were wont to celebrate the Passover;
			and that we also ought to keep Easter when the Sunday comes. And
			that this must be so, there is this cogent reason. It is written in
			Genesis,<a href="#note_967" id="noteref_967" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">967</span></span></a>
			<span class="tei tei-q">‘And God made two great lights; the greater
			light to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the
			night.’</span> Or, as another edition<a href="#note_968" id="noteref_968" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">968</span></span></a> has
			it, <span class="tei tei-q">‘The greater light to begin the day,
			and the lesser to <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page367">[pg
			367]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg367"/>
			begin the night.’</span> As, therefore, the sun, coming forth from
			the midst of the east, fixed the vernal equinox by his rising, and
			afterwards the moon at the full, when the sun set in the evening,
			followed from the midst of the east; so every year the same first
			lunar month must be observed in the like order, so that its full
			moon must not be before the equinox; but either on the very day of
			the equinox, as it was in the beginning, or after it is past. But
			if the full moon shall happen to be but one day before the time of
			the equinox, the aforesaid reason proves that such moon is not to
			be assigned to the first month of the new year, but rather to the
			last of the preceding, and that it is therefore not meet for the
			celebration of the Paschal festival.</span></p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Now if it please you likewise to hear the mystical
			reason in this matter, we are commanded to keep Easter in the first
			month of the year, which is also called the month of new things,
			because we ought to celebrate the mysteries of our Lord's
			Resurrection and our deliverance, with the spirit of our minds
			renewed to the love of heavenly things. We are commanded to keep it
			in the third week of the same month, because Christ Himself, who
			had been promised before the Law, and under the Law, came with
			grace, in the third age of the world, to be sacrificed as our
			Passover; and because rising from the dead the third day after the
			offering of His Passion, He wished this to be called the Lord's
			day, and the Paschal feast of His Resurrection to be yearly
			celebrated on the same; because, also, we do then only truly
			celebrate His solemn festival, if we endeavour with Him to keep the
			Passover, that is, the passing from this world to the Father, by
			faith, hope, and charity. We are commanded to observe the full moon
			of the Paschal month after the vernal equinox, to the end, that the
			sun may first make the day longer than the night, and then the moon
			may show to the world her full orb of light; inasmuch as first
			<span class="tei tei-q">‘the Sun of righteousness, with healing in
			His wings,’</span><a href="#note_969" id="noteref_969" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">969</span></span></a> that
			is, our Lord Jesus, by the triumph of His Resurrection,
			<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page368">[pg 368]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg368"/> dispelled all the
			darkness of death, and so ascending into Heaven, filled His Church,
			which is often signified by the name of the moon, with the light of
			inward grace, by sending down upon her His Spirit. Which order of
			our salvation the prophet had in his mind, when he said
			<span class="tei tei-q">‘The sun was exalted and the moon stood in
			her order.’</span></span><a href="#note_970" id="noteref_970" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">970</span></span></a></p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“He, therefore, who shall contend that the full Paschal
			moon can happen before the equinox, disagrees with the doctrine of
			the Holy Scriptures, in the celebration of the greatest mysteries,
			and agrees with those who trust that they may be saved without the
			grace of Christ preventing them,<a href="#note_971" id="noteref_971" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">971</span></span></a> and
			who presume to teach that they might have attained to perfect
			righteousness, though the true Light had never by death and
			resurrection vanquished the darkness of the world. Thus, after the
			rising of the sun at the equinox, and after the full moon of the
			first month following in her order, that is, after the end of the
			fourteenth day of the same month, all which we have received by the
			Law to be observed, we still, as we are taught in the Gospel, wait
			in the third week for the Lord's day; and so, at length, we
			celebrate the offering of our Easter solemnity, to show that we are
			not, with the ancients, doing honour to the casting off of the yoke
			of Egyptian bondage; but that, with devout faith and love, we
			worship the Redemption of the whole world, which having been
			prefigured in the deliverance of the ancient people of God, was
			fulfilled in Christ's Resurrection, and that we may signify that we
			rejoice in the sure and certain hope of our own resurrection, which
			we believe will likewise happen on the Lord's day.</span></p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Now this computation of Easter, which we set forth to
			you to be followed, is contained in a cycle of nineteen years,
			which began long since to be observed in the Church, to wit, even
			in the time of the Apostles, especially at Rome and in Egypt, as
			has been said above.<a href="#note_972" id="noteref_972" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">972</span></span></a>
			<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page369">[pg 369]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg369"/> But by the industry
			of Eusebius,<a href="#note_973" id="noteref_973" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">973</span></span></a> who
			took his surname from the blessed martyr Pamphilus,<a href="#note_974" id="noteref_974" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">974</span></span></a> it
			was reduced to a plainer system; insomuch that what till then used
			to be enjoined every year throughout all the Churches by the Bishop
			of Alexandria, might, from that time forward, be most easily known
			by all men, the occurrence of the fourteenth moon being regularly
			set forth in its course. This Paschal computation,
			Theophilus,<a href="#note_975" id="noteref_975" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">975</span></span></a>
			Bishop of Alexandria, made for the Emperor Theodosius, for a
			hundred years to come. Cyril<a href="#note_976" id="noteref_976" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">976</span></span></a> also,
			his successor, comprised a series of ninety-five years in five
			cycles of nineteen years. After whom, Dionysius Exiguus<a href="#note_977" id="noteref_977" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">977</span></span></a> added
			as many more, in order, after the same manner, reaching down to our
			own time. The expiration of these is now drawing near, but there is
			at the present day so great a number of calculators, that even in
			our Churches throughout Britain, there are many who, having learned
			the ancient rules of the Egyptians, can with great ease carry on
			the Paschal cycles for any length of time, even to five hundred and
			<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page370">[pg 370]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg370"/> thirty-two
			years,<a href="#note_978" id="noteref_978" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">978</span></span></a> if
			they will; after the expiration of which, all that appertains to
			the succession of sun and moon, month and week, returns in the same
			order as before. We therefore forbear to send you these same cycles
			of the times to come, because, desiring only to be instructed
			respecting the reason for the Paschal time, you show that you have
			enough of those catholic cycles concerning Easter.</span></p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But having said thus much briefly and succinctly, as
			you required, concerning Easter, I also exhort you to take heed
			that the tonsure, concerning which likewise you desired me to write
			to you, be in accordance with the use of the Church and the
			Christian Faith. And we know indeed that the Apostles were not all
			shorn after the same manner, nor does the Catholic Church now, as
			it agrees in one faith, hope, and charity towards God, use one and
			the same form of tonsure throughout the world. Moreover, to look
			back to former times, to wit, the times of the patriarchs, Job, the
			pattern of patience, when tribulation came upon him, shaved his
			head,<a href="#note_979" id="noteref_979" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">979</span></span></a> and
			thus made it appear that he had used, in time of prosperity, to let
			his hair grow. But concerning Joseph, who more than other men
			practised and taught chastity, humility, piety, and the other
			virtues, we read that he was shorn when he was to be delivered from
			bondage,<a href="#note_980" id="noteref_980" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">980</span></span></a> by
			which it appears, that during the time of his bondage, he was in
			the prison with unshorn hair. Behold then how each of these men of
			God differed in the manner of their appearance abroad, though their
			inward consciences agreed in a like grace of virtue. But though we
			may be free to confess, that the difference of tonsure is not
			hurtful to those whose faith is pure towards God, and their charity
			sincere towards their neighbour, especially since we do not read
			that there was ever any controversy among the Catholic fathers
			about the difference of tonsure, as there has been a contention
			about the diversity in keeping Easter, and in matters of faith;
			nevertheless, among all the forms of tonsure that are to be found
			in <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page371">[pg 371]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg371"/> the Church, or among
			mankind at large, I think none more meet to be followed and
			received by us than that which that disciple wore on his head, to
			whom, after his confession of Himself, our Lord said,<a href="#note_981" id="noteref_981" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">981</span></span></a>
			<span class="tei tei-q">‘Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will
			build My Church, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against
			it, and I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of
			Heaven.’</span> Nor do I think that any is more rightly to be
			abhorred and detested by all the faithful, than that which that man
			used, to whom that same Peter, when he would have bought the grace
			of the Holy Ghost, said,<a href="#note_982" id="noteref_982" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">982</span></span></a>
			<span class="tei tei-q">‘Thy money perish with thee, because thou
			hast thought that the gift of God may be purchased with money. Thou
			hast neither part nor lot in this word.’</span> Nor do we shave
			ourselves in the form of a crown only because Peter was so shorn;
			but because Peter was so shorn in memory of the Passion of our
			Lord, therefore we also, who desire to be saved by the same
			Passion, do with him bear the sign of the same Passion on the top
			of our head, which is the highest part of our body. For as all the
			Church, because it was made a Church by the death of Him that gave
			it life, is wont to bear the sign of His Holy Cross on the
			forehead, to the end, that it may, by the constant protection of
			His banner, be defended from the assaults of evil spirits, and by
			the frequent admonition of the same be taught, in like manner, to
			crucify the flesh with its affections and lusts;<a href="#note_983" id="noteref_983" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">983</span></span></a> so
			also it behoves those, who having either taken the vows of a monk,
			or having the degree of a clerk, must needs curb themselves the
			more strictly by continence, for the Lord's sake, to bear each one
			of them on his head, by the tonsure, the form of the crown of
			thorns which He bore on His head in His Passion, that He might bear
			the thorns and thistles of our sins, that is, that he might bear
			them away and take them from us; to the end that they may show on
			their foreheads that they also willingly, and readily, endure all
			scoffing and <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page372">[pg
			372]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg372"/>
			reproach for his sake; and that they may signify that they await
			always <span class="tei tei-q">‘the crown of eternal life, which
			God hath promised to them that love him,’</span><a href="#note_984" id="noteref_984" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">984</span></span></a> and
			that for the sake of attaining thereto they despise both the evil
			and the good of this world. But as for the tonsure which Simon
			Magus is said to have used, who is there of the faithful, I ask
			you, who does not straightway detest and reject it at the first
			sight of it, together with his magic? Above the forehead it does
			seem indeed to resemble a crown; but when you come to look at the
			neck, you will find the crown cut short which you thought you saw;
			so that you may perceive that such a use properly belongs not to
			Christians but to Simoniacs, such as were indeed in this life by
			erring men thought worthy of the glory of an everlasting crown; but
			in that which is to follow this life are not only deprived of all
			hope of a crown, but are moreover condemned to eternal
			punishment.</span></p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But do not think that I have said thus much, as though
			I judged them worthy to be condemned who use this tonsure, if they
			uphold the catholic unity by their faith and works; nay, I
			confidently declare, that many of them have been holy men and
			worthy servants of God. Of which number is Adamnan,<a href="#note_985" id="noteref_985" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">985</span></span></a> the
			notable abbot and priest of the followers of Columba, who, when
			sent on a mission by his nation to King Aldfrid, desired to see our
			monastery, and forasmuch as he showed wonderful wisdom, humility,
			and piety in his words and behaviour, I said to him among other
			things, when I talked with him, <span class="tei tei-q">‘I beseech
			you, holy brother, how is it that you, who believe that you are
			advancing to the crown of life, which knows no end, wear on your
			head, after a fashion ill-suited to your belief, the likeness of a
			crown that has an end? And if you seek the fellowship of the
			blessed Peter, why do you imitate the likeness of the tonsure of
			him whom St. Peter anathematized? and why do you not rather even
			now show that you choose with <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page373">[pg 373]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg373"/> all your heart the fashion of him with whom
			you desire to live in bliss for ever.’</span> He answered,
			<span class="tei tei-q">‘Be assured, my dear brother, that though I
			wear the tonsure of Simon, according to the custom of my country,
			yet I detest and abhor with all my soul the heresy of Simon; and I
			desire, as far as lies in my small power, to follow the footsteps
			of the most blessed chief of the Apostles.’</span> I replied,
			<span class="tei tei-q">‘I verily believe it; nevertheless it is a
			token that you embrace in your inmost heart whatever is of Peter
			the Apostle, if you also observe in outward form that which you
			know to be his. For I think your wisdom easily discerns that it is
			much better to estrange from your countenance, already dedicated to
			God, the fashion of his countenance whom with all your heart you
			abhor, and of whose hideous face you would shun the sight; and, on
			the other hand, that it beseems you to imitate the manner of his
			appearance, whom you seek to have for your advocate before God,
			even as you desire to follow his actions and his
			teaching.’</span></span></p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“This I said at that time to Adamnan, who indeed showed
			how much he had profited by seeing the ordinances of our Churches,
			when, returning into Scotland,<a href="#note_986" id="noteref_986" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">986</span></span></a> he
			afterwards by his preaching led great numbers of that nation to the
			catholic observance of the Paschal time; though he was not yet able
			to bring back to the way of the better ordinance the monks that
			lived in the island of Hii over whom he presided with the special
			authority of a superior. He would also have been mindful to amend
			the tonsure, if his influence had availed so far.</span></p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But I now also admonish your wisdom, O king, that
			together with the nation, over which the King of kings, and Lord of
			lords, has placed you, you strive to observe in all points those
			things which are in accord with the unity of the Catholic and
			Apostolic Church; for so it will come to pass, that after you have
			held sway in a temporal kingdom, the blessed chief of the Apostles
			will also willingly open to you and yours with all the elect the
			entrance into the heavenly kingdom. The grace of <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page374">[pg 374]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg374"/> the eternal King preserve you in
			safety, long reigning for the peace of us all, my dearly beloved
			son in Christ.”</span></p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">This letter
			having been read in the presence of King Naiton and many learned
			men, and carefully interpreted into his own language by those who
			could understand it, he is said to have much rejoiced at the
			exhortation thereof; insomuch that, rising from among his nobles
			that sat about him, he knelt on the ground, giving thanks to God
			that he had been found worthy to receive such a gift from the land
			of the English. <span class="tei tei-q">“And indeed,”</span> he
			said, <span class="tei tei-q">“I knew before, that this was the
			true celebration of Easter, but now I so fully learn the reason for
			observing this time, that I seem in all points to have known but
			little before concerning these matters. Therefore I publicly
			declare and protest to you that are here present, that I will for
			ever observe this time of Easter, together with all my nation; and
			I do decree that this tonsure, which we have heard to be
			reasonable, shall be received by all clerks in my kingdom.”</span>
			Without delay he accomplished by his royal authority what he had
			said. For straightway the Paschal cycles of nineteen years were
			sent by command of the State throughout all the provinces of the
			Picts to be transcribed, learned, and observed, the erroneous
			cycles of eighty-four years being everywhere blotted out.<a href="#note_987" id="noteref_987" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">987</span></span></a> All
			the ministers of the altar and monks were shorn after the fashion
			of the crown; and the nation thus reformed, rejoiced, as being
			newly put under the guidance of Peter, the most blessed chief of
			the Apostles, and committed to his protection.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
			<a id="toc295"/> <a id="pdf296"/>
			<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_V_Chap_XXII"/>
			-->
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
