<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-4" id="chapter-4-20" epub:type="chapter">
			<!--Page 264-->
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XX</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">A Hymn concerning her.</p>
			</header>
			<p>It seems fitting
			to insert in this history a hymn concerning virginity, which we
			composed in elegiac verse many years ago, in praise and honour of
			the same queen and bride of Christ, and therefore truly a queen,
			because the bride of Christ; and to imitate the method of Holy
			Scripture, wherein many songs are inserted in the history, and
			these, as is well known, are composed in metre and verse.</p>
			<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Trinity,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-669" id="noteref-669" epub:type="noteref">669</a>
			Gracious, Divine, Who rulest all the ages; favour my task, Trinity,
			Gracious, Divine.</span></p>
			<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Let Maro sound the trumpet of war, let us sing the
			gifts of peace; the gifts of Christ we sing, let Maro sound the
			trumpet of war.</span></p>
			<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Chaste is my song, no rape of guilty Helen; light
			tales shall be told by the wanton, chaste is my song.</span></p>
			<p><span class="tei tei-q">“I will tell of gifts from Heaven, not wars of hapless
			Troy; I will tell of gifts from Heaven, wherein the earth is
			glad.</span></p>
			<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Lo! the high God comes to the womb of a holy virgin,
			to be the Saviour of men, lo! the high God comes.</span></p>
			<p><span class="tei tei-q">“A hallowed maid gives birth to Him Who gave the world
			its being; Mary, the gate of God, a maiden gives Him
			birth.</span></p>
			<p><span class="tei tei-q">“The company of her fellows rejoices over the Virgin
			Mother of Him Who wields the thunder; a shining virgin band, the
			company of her fellows rejoices.</span></p>
			<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Her honour has made many a blossom to spring
			<!--Page 265-->from that pure
			shoot, virgin blossoms her honour has made to spring.</span></p>
			<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Scorched by the fierce flames, the maiden Agatha<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-670" id="noteref-670" epub:type="noteref">670</a>
			yielded not; in like manner Eulalia endures, scorched by the fierce
			flames.</span></p>
			<p><span class="tei tei-q">“The lofty soul of chaste Tecla overcomes the wild
			beasts; chaste Euphemia overcomes the accursed wild
			beasts.</span></p>
			<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Agnes joyously laughs at the sword, herself stronger
			than steel, Cecilia joyously laughs at the foemen's
			sword.</span></p>
			<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Many a triumph is mighty throughout the world in
			temperate hearts; throughout the world love of the temperate life
			is mighty.</span></p>
			<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Yea, and our day likewise a peerless maiden has
			blessed; peerless our Ethelthryth shines.</span></p>
			<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Child of a noble sire, and glorious by royal birth,
			more noble in her Lord's sight, the child of a noble
			sire.</span></p>
			<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Thence she receives queenly honour and a sceptre in
			this world; thence she receives honour, awaiting higher honour
			above.</span></p>
			<p><span class="tei tei-q">“What need, gracious lady, to seek an earthly lord,
			even now given to the Heavenly Bridegroom?</span></p><!--Page 266-->
			<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Christ is at hand, the Bridegroom (why seek an earthly
			lord?) that thou mayst follow even now, methinks, in the steps of
			the Mother of Heaven's King, that thou too mayst be a mother in
			God.</span></p>
			<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Twelve years<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-671" id="noteref-671" epub:type="noteref">671</a> she
			had reigned, a bride dedicated to God, then in the cloister dwelt,
			a bride dedicated to God.</span></p>
			<p><span class="tei tei-q">“To Heaven all consecrated she lived, abounding in
			lofty deeds, then to Heaven all consecrated she gave up her
			soul.</span></p>
			<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Twice eight Novembers<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-672" id="noteref-672" epub:type="noteref">672</a> the
			maid's fair flesh lay in the tomb, nor did the maid's fair flesh
			see corruption in the tomb.</span></p>
			<p><span class="tei tei-q">“This was Thy work, O Christ, that her very garments
			were bright and undefiled even in the grave; O Christ, this was Thy
			work.</span></p>
			<p><span class="tei tei-q">“The dark serpent<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-673" id="noteref-673" epub:type="noteref">673</a> flies
			before the honour due to the holy raiment; disease is driven away,
			and the dark serpent flies.</span></p>
			<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Rage fills the foe who of old conquered Eve; exultant
			the maiden triumphs and rage fills the foe.</span></p>
			<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Behold, O bride of God, thy glory upon earth; the
			glory that awaits thee in the Heavens behold, O bride of
			God.</span></p>
			<p><span class="tei tei-q">“In gladness thou receivest gifts, bright amidst the
			festal torches; behold! the Bridegroom comes, in gladness thou
			receivest gifts.</span></p>
			<p><span class="tei tei-q">“And a new song thou singest to the tuneful harp; a
			new-made bride, thou exultest in the tuneful hymn.</span></p>
			<p><span class="tei tei-q">“None can part her from them which follow the Lamb
			<!--Page 267-->enthroned on high,
			whom none had severed from the Love enthroned on high.”</span></p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
