<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-4" id="chapter-4-31" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXXI</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">Of one that was cured of a palsy at his tomb.</p>
			</header>
			<p>There was in
			that same monastery a brother whose name was Badudegn, who had for
			no small time ministered to the guests of the house, and is still
			living, having the testimony of all the brothers and strangers
			resorting thither, of being a man of much piety and religion, and
			serving the office put upon him only for the sake of the heavenly
			reward. This man, having one day washed in the sea the coverings or
			blankets which he used in the guest chamber, was returning home,
			when on the way, he was seized with a sudden infirmity, insomuch
			that he fell to the ground, and lay there a long time and could
			scarce at last rise again. When he got up, he felt one half of his
			body, from the head to the foot, struck with palsy, and with great
			trouble made his way home by the help of a staff. The disease
			increased by degrees, and as night approached, became still worse,
			so that when day returned, he could scarcely rise or walk alone.
			Suffering from this trouble, he conceived the wise resolve to go to
			the church, as best he could, and approach the tomb of the reverend
			father Cuthbert, and there, on his knees, humbly beseech the mercy
			of God that he might either be delivered from that disease, if it
			were well for him, or if by the grace of God it was ordained for
			him to be chastened longer by this affliction, that he might bear
			the pain which was laid upon him with patience and a quiet
			mind.</p>
			<p>He did
			accordingly as he had determined, and supporting his weak limbs
			with a staff, entered the church. There prostrating himself before
			the body of the man of God, he prayed with pious earnestness, that,
			through his intercession, the Lord might be propitious to him. As
			he prayed, he seemed to fall into a deep sleep, and, <!--Page 299-->as he was afterwards wont to relate,
			felt a large and broad hand touch his head, where the pain lay, and
			likewise pass over all that part of his body which had been
			benumbed by the disease, down to his feet. Gradually the pain
			departed and health returned. Then he awoke, and rose up in perfect
			health, and returning thanks to the Lord for his recovery, told the
			brothers what had been done for him; and to the joy of them all,
			returned the more zealously, as if chastened by the trial of his
			affliction, to the service which he was wont before to perform with
			care.</p>
			<p>Moreover, the
			very garments which had been on Cuthbert's body, dedicated to God,
			either while he was alive, or after his death, were not without the
			virtue of healing, as may be seen in the book of his life and
			miracles, by such as shall read it.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
