<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-3" id="chapter-3-14" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">How on the death of Paulinus, Ithamar was made bishop of Rochester in his stead; and of the wonderful humility of King Oswin, who was cruelly slain by Oswy. [644-651 a.d.]</p>
			</header>
			<p id="chapter-3-14-p-2">Oswald being translated to the heavenly kingdom, his brother Oswy,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-355" id="noteref-355" epub:type="noteref">355</a> a young man of about thirty years of age, succeeded him on the throne of his earthly kingdom, and held it twenty-eight years with much trouble, being attacked by the pagan nation of the Mercians, that had slain his brother, as also by his son Alchfrid,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-356" id="noteref-356" epub:type="noteref">356</a> and by his nephew Oidilwald,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-357" id="noteref-357" epub:type="noteref">357</a> the son of his brother who reigned before him. In his second year, that is, in the year of our Lord 644, the most reverend Father Paulinus, formerly Bishop of York, but at that time Bishop of the city of Rochester, departed to the Lord, on the 10th day of October, having held the office of a bishop nineteen years, two months, and twenty-one days; and was buried in the sacristy of the blessed Apostle Andrew,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-358" id="noteref-358" epub:type="noteref">358</a> which King Ethelbert had built from the foundation, in the same city of Rochester. In his place, Archbishop Honorius <!--Page 164-->ordained Ithamar,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-359" id="noteref-359" epub:type="noteref">359</a> of the Kentish nation, but not inferior to his predecessors in learning and conduct of life.</p>
			<p>Oswy, during the first part of his reign, had a partner in the royal dignity called Oswin, of the race of King Edwin, and son to Osric<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-360" id="noteref-360" epub:type="noteref">360</a> of whom we have spoken above, a man of wonderful piety and devotion, who governed the province of the Deiri seven years in very great prosperity, and was himself beloved by all men. But Oswy, who governed all the other northern part of the nation beyond the Humber, that is, the province of the Bernicians, could not live at peace with him; and at last, when the causes of their disagreement increased, he murdered him most cruelly. For when each had raised an army against the other, Oswin perceived that he could not maintain a war against his enemy who had more auxiliaries than himself, and he thought it better at that time to lay aside all thoughts of engaging, and to reserve himself for better times. He therefore disbanded the army which he had assembled, and ordered all his men to return to their own homes, from the place that is called Wilfaraesdun,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-361" id="noteref-361" epub:type="noteref">361</a> that is, Wilfar's Hill, which is about ten miles distant from the village called Cataract, towards the north-west. He himself, with only one trusty thegn, whose name was Tondhere, withdrew and lay concealed in the house of Hunwald, a noble,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-362" id="noteref-362" epub:type="noteref">362</a> whom he imagined to be his most assured friend. But, alas! it was far otherwise; for Hunwald betrayed him, and Oswy, by the hands of his reeve, Ethilwin, foully slew him and the thegn aforesaid. This happened on the 20th of August, in the ninth year of his reign, at a place called Ingetlingum, where afterwards, to atone for this <!--Page 165-->crime, a monastery was built,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-363" id="noteref-363" epub:type="noteref">363</a> wherein prayers should be daily offered up to God for the redemption of the souls of both kings, to wit, of him that was murdered, and of him that commanded the murder.</p>
			<p>King Oswin was of a goodly countenance, and tall of stature, pleasant in discourse, and courteous in behaviour; and bountiful to all, gentle and simple alike; so that he was beloved by all men for the royal dignity of his mind and appearance and actions, and men of the highest rank came from almost all provinces to serve him. Among all the graces of virtue and moderation by which he was distinguished and, if I may say so, blessed in a special manner, humility is said to have been the greatest, which it will suffice to prove by one instance.</p>
			<p>He had given a beautiful horse to Bishop Aidan, to use either in crossing rivers, or in performing a journey upon any urgent necessity, though the Bishop was wont to travel ordinarily on foot. Some short time after, a poor man meeting the Bishop, and asking alms, he immediately dismounted, and ordered the horse, with all his royal trappings, to be given to the beggar; for he was very compassionate, a great friend to the poor, and, in a manner, the father of the wretched. This being told to the king, when they were going in to dinner, he said to the Bishop, <span class="tei tei-q">“What did you mean, my lord Bishop, by giving the poor man that royal horse, which it was fitting that you should have for your own use? Had not we many other horses of less value, or things of other sorts, which would have been good enough to give to the poor, instead of giving that horse, which I had chosen and set apart for your own use?”</span> Thereupon the Bishop answered, <span class="tei tei-q">“What do you say, O king? Is that son of a mare more dear to you than that son of God?”</span> Upon this they went in to dinner, and the Bishop sat in his place; but the king, who had come in from hunting, stood warming himself, with his attendants, at the fire. Then, on a sudden, whilst he was warming himself, calling <!--Page 166--> to mind what the bishop had said to him, he ungirt his sword, and gave it to a servant, and hastened to the Bishop and fell down at his feet, beseeching him to forgive him; <span class="tei tei-q">“For from this time forward,”</span> said he, <span class="tei tei-q">“I will never speak any more of this, nor will I judge of what or how much of our money you shall give to the sons of God.”</span> The bishop was much moved at this sight, and starting up, raised him, saying that he was entirely reconciled to him, if he would but sit down to his meat, and lay aside all sorrow. The king, at the bishop's command and request, was comforted, but the bishop, on the other hand, grew sad and was moved even to tears. His priest then asking him, in the language of his country, which the king and his servants did not understand, why he wept, <span class="tei tei-q">“I know,”</span> said he, <span class="tei tei-q">“that the king will not live long; for I never before saw a humble king; whence I perceive that he will soon be snatched out of this life, because this nation is not worthy of such a ruler.”</span> Not long after, the bishop's gloomy foreboding was fulfilled by the king's sad death, as has been said above. But Bishop Aidan himself was also taken out of this world, not more than twelve days after the death of the king he loved, on the 31st of August,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-364" id="noteref-364" epub:type="noteref">364</a> to receive the eternal reward of his labours from the Lord.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
