<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-5" id="chapter-5-15" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XV</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">How divers churches of the Scots, at the instance of Adamnan, adopted the Catholic Easter; and how the same wrote a book about the holy places. [703 a.d.]</p>
			</header>
			<p>At this time a
			great part of the Scots in Ireland,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-852" id="noteref-852" epub:type="noteref">852</a> and
			some also of the Britons in Britain,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-853" id="noteref-853" epub:type="noteref">853</a> by
			the grace of God, adopted the reasonable and ecclesiastical time of
			keeping Easter. For when Adamnan,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-854" id="noteref-854" epub:type="noteref">854</a>
			priest and abbot of the monks that were in the island of Hii, was
			sent by his nation on a mission to Aldfrid, king of the
			English,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-855" id="noteref-855" epub:type="noteref">855</a> he
			abode some time in that province, and saw the canonical rites of
			the Church. Moreover, he was earnestly admonished by many of the
			more learned sort, not to presume to live contrary to the universal
			custom of the Church, either in regard to the observance of Easter,
			or any other ordinances whatsoever, with those few followers of his
			dwelling in the farthest corner of the world. <!--Page 337-->Wherefore he so changed his mind, that
			he readily preferred those things which he had seen and heard in
			the English churches, to the customs which he and his people had
			hitherto followed. For he was a good and wise man, and excellently
			instructed in knowledge of the Scriptures. Returning home, he
			endeavoured to bring his own people that were in Hii, or that were
			subject to that monastery, into the way of truth, which he had
			embraced with all his heart; but he could not prevail. He sailed
			over into Ireland,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-856" id="noteref-856" epub:type="noteref">856</a> and
			preaching to those people, and with sober words of exhortation
			making known to them the lawful time of Easter, he brought back
			many of them, and almost all that were free from the dominion of
			those of Hii, from the error of their fathers to the Catholic
			unity, and taught them to keep the lawful time of Easter.</p>
			<p>Returning to his
			island, after having celebrated the canonical Easter in Ireland, he
			was instant in preaching the Catholic observance of the season of
			Easter in his monastery, yet without being able to achieve his end;
			and it so happened that he departed this life before the next year
			came round,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-857" id="noteref-857" epub:type="noteref">857</a> the
			Divine goodness so ordaining it, that as he was a great lover of
			peace and unity, he should be taken away to everlasting life before
			he should be obliged, on the return of the season of Easter, to be
			at greater variance with those that would not follow him into the
			truth.</p>
			<p>This same man
			wrote a book concerning the holy places, of great profit to many
			readers; his authority was the teaching and dictation of Arculf, a
			bishop of Gaul,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-858" id="noteref-858" epub:type="noteref">858</a> who
			had gone to Jerusalem for the sake of the <!--Page 338-->holy places; and having wandered over all the
			Promised Land, travelled also to Damascus, Constantinople,
			Alexandria, and many islands in the sea, and returning home by
			ship, was cast upon the western coast of Britain by a great
			tempest. After many adventures he came to the aforesaid servant of
			Christ, Adamnan, and being found to be learned in the Scriptures,
			and acquainted with the holy places, was most gladly received by
			him and gladly heard, insomuch that whatsoever he said that he had
			seen worthy of remembrance in the holy places, Adamnan straightway
			set himself to commit to writing. Thus he composed a work, as I
			have said, profitable to many, and chiefly to those who, being far
			removed from those places where the patriarchs and Apostles lived,
			know no more of them than what they have learnt by reading. Adamnan
			presented this book to King Aldfrid, and through his bounty it came
			to be read by lesser persons.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-859" id="noteref-859" epub:type="noteref">859</a> The
			writer thereof was also rewarded by him with many gifts and sent
			back into his country. I believe it will be of advantage to our
			readers if we collect some passages from his writings, and insert
			them in this our History.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-860" id="noteref-860" epub:type="noteref">860</a></p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
