<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2" id="chapter-2-11" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XI</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">How Pope Boniface advised the king's consort to use her best endeavours for his salvation. [Circ.625 a.d.]</p>
			</header>
			<p>The same pope
			also wrote to King Edwin's consort, Ethelberg, to this effect:</p>
			<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
			<p><span style="font-size: 90%">THE COPY OF THE LETTER OF THE MOST BLESSED AND
			APOSTOLIC BONIFACE, POPE OF THE CITY OF ROME, TO ETHELBERG, KING
			EDWIN'S QUEEN.</span></p>
			<p><span class="tei tei-q"><span style="font-size: 90%">“</span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">To
			the illustrious lady his daughter, Queen Ethelberg, Boniface,
			bishop, servant of the servants of God.</span></span><span style="font-size: 90%">The goodness of our Redeemer has in His abundant
			Providence offered the means of salvation to the human race,
			which He rescued, by the shedding of His precious Blood, from the
			bonds of captivity to the Devil; to the end that, when He had
			made known His name in divers ways to the nations, they might
			acknowledge their Creator by embracing the mystery of the
			Christian faith. And this the mystical purification of your
			regeneration plainly shows to have been bestowed upon the mind of
			your Highness by God's gift. Our heart, therefore, has greatly
			rejoiced in the benefit bestowed by the bounty of the Lord, for
			that He has vouchsafed, in your confession, to kindle a spark of
			the orthodox religion, by which He might the more easily inflame
			with the love of Himself the understanding, not only of your
			illustrious consort, but also of all the nation that is subject
			to you.</span></span></p>
			<p><span class="tei tei-q"><span style="font-size: 90%">“</span><span style="font-size: 90%">For we have been informed by those, who came to
			acquaint us with the laudable conversion of our
			illustrious</span> <!--Page 110--><span style="font-size: 90%">son, King
			Eadbald, that your Highness, also, having received the wonderful
			mystery of the Christian faith, continually excels in the
			performance of works pious and acceptable to God; that you
			likewise carefully refrain from the worship of idols, and the
			deceits of temples and auguries, and with unimpaired devotion,
			give yourself so wholly to the love of your Redeemer, as never to
			cease from lending your aid in spreading the Christian faith. But
			when our fatherly love earnestly inquired concerning your
			illustrious consort, we were given to understand, that he still
			served abominable idols, and delayed to yield obedience in giving
			ear to the voice of the preachers. This occasioned us no small
			grief, that he that is one flesh with you still remained a
			stranger to the knowledge of the supreme and undivided Trinity.
			Whereupon we, in our fatherly care, have not delayed to admonish
			and exhort your Christian Highness, to the end that, filled with
			the support of the Divine inspiration, you should not defer to
			strive, both in season and out of season, that with the
			co-operating power of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, your
			husband also may be added to the number of Christians; that so
			you may uphold the rights of marriage in the bond of a holy and
			unblemished union. For it is written,</span> <span class="tei tei-q"><span style="font-size: 90%">‘</span><span style="font-size: 90%">They twain shall be one
			flesh.</span><span style="font-size: 90%">’</span></span><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-223" id="noteref-223" epub:type="noteref">223</a>
			<span style="font-size: 90%">How then can it be said, that there
			is unity in the bond between you, if he continues a stranger to
			the brightness of your faith, separated from it by the darkness
			of detestable error?</span></span></p>
			<p><span class="tei tei-q"><span style="font-size: 90%">“</span><span style="font-size: 90%">Wherefore, applying yourself continually to
			prayer, do not cease to beg of the long-suffering of the Divine
			Mercy the benefits of his illumination; to the end, that those
			whom the union of carnal affection has manifestly made in a
			manner to be one body, may, after this life continue in perpetual
			fellowship, by the unity of faith. Persist, therefore,
			illustrious daughter, and to the utmost of your power endeavour
			to soften the hardness of his heart by carefully making known to
			him the Divine precepts; pouring into his mind a knowledge of the
			greatness of</span> <!--Page 111--><span style="font-size: 90%">that mystery
			which you have received by faith, and of the marvellous reward
			which, by the new birth, you have been made worthy to obtain.
			Inflame the coldness of his heart by the message of the Holy
			Ghost, that he may put from him the deadness of an evil worship,
			and the warmth of the Divine faith may kindle his understanding
			through your frequent exhortations; and so the testimony of Holy
			Scripture may shine forth clearly, fulfilled by you,</span>
			<span class="tei tei-q"><span style="font-size: 90%">‘</span><span style="font-size: 90%">The
			unbelieving husband shall be saved by the believing
			wife.</span><span style="font-size: 90%">’</span></span><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-224" id="noteref-224" epub:type="noteref">224</a>
			<span style="font-size: 90%">For to this end you have obtained
			the mercy of the Lord's goodness, that you might restore with
			increase to your Redeemer the fruit of faith and of the benefits
			entrusted to your hands. That you may be able to fulfil this
			task, supported by the help of His loving kindness we do not
			cease to implore with frequent prayers.</span></span></p>
			<p><span class="tei tei-q"><span style="font-size: 90%">“</span><span style="font-size: 90%">Having premised thus much, in pursuance of the
			duty of our fatherly affection, we exhort you, that when the
			opportunity of a bearer shall offer, you will with all speed
			comfort us with the glad tidings of the wonderful work which the
			heavenly Power shall vouchsafe to perform by your means in the
			conversion</span><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-225" id="noteref-225" epub:type="noteref">225</a>
			<span style="font-size: 90%">of your consort, and of the nation
			subject to you; to the end, that our solicitude, which earnestly
			awaits the fulfilment of its desire in the soul's salvation of
			you and yours, may, by hearing from you, be set at rest; and that
			we, discerning more fully the light of the Divine propitiation
			shed abroad in you, may with a joyful confession abundantly
			return due thanks to God, the Giver of all good things, and to
			the blessed Peter, the chief of the Apostles.</span></span></p>
			<p><span class="tei tei-q"><span style="font-size: 90%">“</span><span style="font-size: 90%">We have, moreover, sent you the blessing of your
			protector, the blessed Peter, the chief of the Apostles, to wit,
			a silver looking-glass, and a gilded ivory comb, which we pray
			your Highness to accept with all the goodwill with which it is
			sent by us.</span><span style="font-size: 90%">”</span></span></p>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
