<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-3" id="chapter-3-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">How Earconbert, King of Kent, ordered the idols to be destroyed; and of his daughter Earcongota, and his kinswoman Ethelberg, virgins consecrated to God. [640 a.d.]</p>
			</header>
			<p>In the year of
			our Lord 640, Eadbald,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-331" id="noteref-331" epub:type="noteref">331</a> king
			of Kent, departed this life, and left his kingdom to his son
			Earconbert, who governed it most nobly twenty-four years and some
			months. He was the first of the English kings that of his supreme
			authority commanded the idols throughout his whole kingdom to be
			forsaken and destroyed, and the fast of forty days to be observed;
			and that the same might not be lightly neglected, he appointed
			fitting and condign punishments for the offenders. His daughter
			Earcongota, as became the offspring of such a parent, was a most
			virtuous virgin, serving God in a monastery in the country of the
			Franks, built by a most noble abbess, named Fara, at a place called
			In Brige;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-332" id="noteref-332" epub:type="noteref">332</a> for
			at that time but few monasteries had been built in the country of
			the Angles, and many were wont, for the sake of monastic life, to
			repair to the monasteries of the Franks or Gauls; and they also
			sent <!--Page 152-->their daughters
			there to be instructed, and united to their Heavenly Bridegroom,
			especially in the monasteries of Brige, of Cale,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-333" id="noteref-333" epub:type="noteref">333</a> and
			Andilegum.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-334" id="noteref-334" epub:type="noteref">334</a> Among
			whom was also Saethryth,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-335" id="noteref-335" epub:type="noteref">335</a>
			daughter of the wife of Anna, king of the East Angles, above
			mentioned; and Ethelberg,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-336" id="noteref-336" epub:type="noteref">336</a> the
			king's own daughter; both of whom, though strangers, were for their
			virtue made abbesses of the monastery of Brige. Sexburg,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-337" id="noteref-337" epub:type="noteref">337</a> that
			king's elder daughter, wife to Earconbert, king of Kent, had a
			daughter called Earcongota,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-338" id="noteref-338" epub:type="noteref">338</a> of
			whom we are about to speak.</p>
			<p>Many wonderful
			works and miracles of this virgin, dedicated to God, are to this
			day related by the inhabitants of that place; but for us it shall
			suffice to say something briefly of her departure out of this world
			to the heavenly kingdom. The day of her summoning drawing near, she
			began to visit in the monastery the cells of the infirm handmaidens
			of Christ, and particularly those that were of a great age, or most
			noted for their virtuous life, and humbly commending herself to
			their prayers, she let them know that her death was at hand, as she
			had learnt by revelation, which she said she had received in this
			manner. She had seen a band of men, clothed in white, come into the
			monastery, and being asked by her what they wanted, and what they
			did there, they answered, <span class="tei tei-q">“They had been
			sent thither to carry away with them the gold coin that had been
			brought thither from Kent.”</span> Towards the close of that same
			night, as morning began to dawn, leaving the darkness of this
			world, she departed to the light of heaven. Many of the brethren of
			that monastery who were in other houses, declared they had then
			plainly heard choirs of singing angels, and, as it were, the sound
			of a multitude entering the monastery. Whereupon going out
			immediately to see what it might be, they beheld a great light
			coming down from heaven, <!--Page 153-->
			which bore that holy soul, set loose from the bonds of the flesh,
			to the eternal joys of the celestial country. They also tell of
			other miracles that were wrought that night in the same monastery
			by the power of God; but as we must proceed to other matters, we
			leave them to be related by those whose concern they are. The body
			of this venerable virgin and bride of Christ was buried in the
			church of the blessed protomartyr, Stephen. It was thought fit,
			three days after, to take up the stone that covered the tomb, and
			to raise it higher in the same place, and whilst they were doing
			this, so sweet a fragrance rose from below, that it seemed to all
			the brethren and sisters there present, as if a store of balsam had
			been opened.</p>
			<p>Her aunt also,
			Ethelberg, of whom we have spoken, preserved the glory, acceptable
			to God, of perpetual virginity, in a life of great self-denial, but
			the extent of her virtue became more conspicuous after her death.
			Whilst she was abbess, she began to build in her monastery a
			church, in honour of all the Apostles, wherein she desired that her
			body should be buried; but when that work was advanced half way,
			she was prevented by death from finishing it, and was buried in the
			place in the church which she had chosen. After her death, the
			brothers occupied themselves with other things, and this structure
			was left untouched for seven years, at the expiration whereof they
			resolved, by reason of the greatness of the work, wholly to abandon
			the building of the church, and to remove the abbess's bones thence
			to some other church that was finished and consecrated. On opening
			her tomb, they found the body as untouched by decay as it had been
			free from the corruption of carnal concupiscence, and having washed
			it again and clothed it in other garments, they removed it to the
			church of the blessed Stephen, the Martyr. And her festival is wont
			to be celebrated there with much honour on the 7th of July.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
