<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2" id="chapter-2-16" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">How Paulinus preached in the province of Lindsey; and of the character of the reign of Edwin. [Circ. 628 a.d.]</p>
			</header>
			<p>Paulinus also
			preached the Word to the province of Lindsey,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-251" id="noteref-251" epub:type="noteref">251</a> which
			is the first on the south side of the river Humber, stretching as
			far as the sea; and he first converted to the Lord the reeve of the
			city of Lincoln, whose name was Blaecca, with his whole house. He
			likewise built, in that city, a stone church of beautiful
			workmanship; the roof of which has either fallen through long
			neglect, or been thrown down by enemies, but the walls are still to
			be seen standing, and every year miraculous cures are wrought in
			that place, for the benefit of those who have faith to seek them.
			In that church, when <!--Page 123-->
			Justus had departed to Christ, Paulinus consecrated Honorius bishop
			in his stead, as will be hereafter mentioned in its proper
			place.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-252" id="noteref-252" epub:type="noteref">252</a> A
			certain priest and abbot of the monastery of Peartaneu,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-253" id="noteref-253" epub:type="noteref">253</a> a man
			of singular veracity, whose name was Deda, told me concerning the
			faith of this province that an old man had informed him that he
			himself had been baptized at noon-day, by Bishop Paulinus, in the
			presence of King Edwin, and with him a great multitude of the
			people, in the river Trent, near the city, which in the English
			tongue is called Tiouulfingacaestir;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-254" id="noteref-254" epub:type="noteref">254</a> and
			he was also wont to describe the person of the same Paulinus,
			saying that he was tall of stature, stooping somewhat, his hair
			black, his visage thin, his nose slender and aquiline, his aspect
			both venerable and awe-inspiring. He had also with him in the
			ministry, James, the deacon,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-255" id="noteref-255" epub:type="noteref">255</a> a man
			of zeal and great fame in Christ and in the church, who lived even
			to our days.</p>
			<p>It is told that
			there was then such perfect peace in Britain, wheresoever the
			dominion of King Edwin extended, that, as is still proverbially
			said, a woman with her new-born babe might walk throughout the
			island, from sea to sea, without receiving any harm. That king took
			such care for the good of his nation, that in several places where
			he had seen clear springs near the highways, he caused stakes to be
			fixed, with copper drinking-vessels hanging on them, for the
			refreshment of travellers; nor durst any man touch them for any
			other purpose than that for which they were designed, either
			through the great dread they had of the king, or for the affection
			which they bore him. His dignity was so great throughout his
			dominions, that not only were his banners <!--Page 124-->borne before him in battle, but even in time
			of peace, when he rode about his cities, townships, or provinces,
			with his thegns, the standard-bearer was always wont to go before
			him. Also, when he walked anywhere along the streets, that sort of
			banner which the Romans call Tufa,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-256" id="noteref-256" epub:type="noteref">256</a> and
			the English, Thuuf, was in like manner borne before him.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
