<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-5" id="chapter-5-24" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">Chronological recapitulation of the whole work: also concerning the author himself.</p>
			</header>
			<p>I have thought
			fit briefly to sum up those things which have been related at
			length under their particular dates, that they may be the better
			kept in memory.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1031" id="noteref-1031" epub:type="noteref">1031</a></p>
			<p>In the sixtieth
			year before the Incarnation of our Lord, Caius Julius Cæsar, first
			of the Romans invaded Britain, and was victorious, yet could not
			maintain the supreme power there. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_II">I, 2</a>.]</p>
			<p>In the year of
			our Lord, 46, Claudius, being the second of the Romans who came to
			Britain, received the surrender of a great part of the island, and
			added the Orkney islands to the Roman empire. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_III">I, 3</a>.]</p>
			<p>In the year of
			our Lord 167, Eleuther, being made bishop at Rome, governed the
			Church most gloriously fifteen years.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1032" id="noteref-1032" epub:type="noteref">1032</a> To
			whom Lucius, king of Britain, sent a letter, asking to be made a
			Christian, and succeeded in obtaining his request. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_IV">I, 4</a>.]</p>
			<p>In the year of
			our Lord 189, Severus, being made emperor, reigned seventeen years;
			he fortified Britain with a rampart from sea to sea. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_V">I, 5</a>.]</p>
			<p>In the year 381,
			Maximus, being made emperor in Britain, crossed over into Gaul, and
			slew Gratian. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_IX">I,
			9</a>.]</p>
			<p>In the year 409,
			Rome was overthrown by the Goths, from which time the Romans ceased
			to rule in Britain. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XI">I, 11</a>.]</p>
			<p>In the year 430,
			Palladius was sent by Pope Celestine <!--Page 383-->to the Scots that believed in Christ to be
			their first bishop. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XIII">I, 13</a>.]</p>
			<p>In the year 449,
			Marcian being made emperor with Valentinian, reigned seven years;
			in whose time the English, being called in by the Britons, came
			into Britain. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XV">I,
			15</a>.]</p>
			<p>In the year 538,
			an eclipse of the sun came to pass on the 16th of February, from
			the first hour until the third.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1033" id="noteref-1033" epub:type="noteref">1033</a></p>
			<p>In the year 540,
			an eclipse of the sun came to pass on the 20th of June, and the
			stars appeared during almost half an hour after the third hour of
			the day.</p>
			<p>In the year 547,
			Ida<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1034" id="noteref-1034" epub:type="noteref">1034</a>
			began to reign; he was the founder of the royal family of the
			Northumbrians, and he reigned twelve years.</p>
			<p>In the year 565,
			the priest, Columba, came out of Scotland,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1035" id="noteref-1035" epub:type="noteref">1035</a> into
			Britain, to teach the Picts, and he built a monastery in the isle
			of Hii. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_IV">III,
			4</a>.]</p>
			<p>In the year 596,
			Pope Gregory sent Augustine with monks into Britain, to preach the
			good tidings of the Word of God to the English nation. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XXIII">I, 23</a>.]</p>
			<p>In the year 597,
			the aforesaid teachers arrived in Britain; being about the 150th
			year from the coming of the English into Britain. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XXV">I, 25</a>.]</p>
			<p>In the year 601,
			Pope Gregory sent the pall into Britain to Augustine, who was
			already made bishop; he sent also several ministers of the Word,
			among whom was Paulinus. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XXIX">I, 29</a>.]</p>
			<p>In the year 603,
			a battle was fought at Degsastan. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_I_Chap_XXXIV">I, 34</a>.]</p>
			<p>In the year 604,
			the East Saxons received the faith of Christ, under King Sabert,
			Mellitus being bishop. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_III">II, 3</a>.]</p><!--Page 384-->
			<p>In the year 605,
			Gregory died. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_I">II,
			1</a>.]</p>
			<p>In the year 616,
			Ethelbert, king of Kent died. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_V">II, 5</a>.]</p>
			<p>In the year 625,
			Paulinus was ordained bishop of the Northumbrians by Archbishop
			Justus. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_IX">II,
			9</a>.]</p>
			<p>In the year 626,
			Eanfled, daughter of King Edwin, was baptized with twelve others,
			on the eve of Whitsunday. [<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ib.</span></span>]</p>
			<p>In the year 627,
			King Edwin was baptized, with his nation, at Easter. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XIV">II, 14</a>.]</p>
			<p>In the year 633,
			King Edwin being killed, Paulinus returned to Kent. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_II_Chap_XX">II, 20</a>.]</p>
			<p>In the year 640,
			Eadbald, king of Kent, died. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_VIII">III, 8</a>.]</p>
			<p>In the year 642,
			King Oswald was slain. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_IX">III, 9</a>.]</p>
			<p>In the year 644,
			Paulinus, formerly bishop of York, but then of the city of
			Rochester, departed to the Lord. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XIV">III, 14</a>.]</p>
			<p>In the year 651,
			King Oswin was killed, and Bishop Aidan died. [<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ibid.</span></span>]</p>
			<p>In the year 653,
			the Middle Angles, under their prince, Penda, were admitted to the
			mysteries of the faith. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXI">III, 21</a>.]</p>
			<p>In the year 655,
			Penda was slain, and the Mercians became Christians. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXIV">III, 24</a>.]</p>
			<p>In the year 664,
			an eclipse came to pass; Earconbert, king of Kent, died; and Colman
			with the Scots returned to his people; a pestilence arose; Ceadda
			and Wilfrid were ordained bishops of the Northumbrians. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_III_Chap_XXVI">III, 26-28</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_I">IV, 1</a>.]</p>
			<p>In the year 668,
			Theodore was ordained bishop. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_I">IV, 1</a>.]</p>
			<p>In the year 670,
			Oswy, king of the Northumbrians, died. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_V">IV, 5</a>.]</p>
			<p>In the year 673,
			Egbert, king of Kent, died; and a synod was held at Hertford, in
			the presence of King Egfrid, Archbishop Theodore presiding: the
			synod was of great profit, and its decrees are contained in ten
			articles. [<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ibid.</span></span>]</p>
			<p>In the year
			675,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1036" id="noteref-1036" epub:type="noteref">1036</a>
			Wulfhere, king of the Mercians, <!--Page 385-->when he had reigned seventeen years, died and
			left the government to his brother Ethelred.</p>
			<p>In the year 676,
			Ethelred ravaged Kent. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XII">IV, 12</a>.]</p>
			<p>In the year 678,
			a comet appeared; Bishop Wilfrid was driven from his see by King
			Egfrid; and Bosa, Eata, and Eadhaed were consecrated bishops in his
			stead. [<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ibid.</span></span>; <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XIX">V, 19</a>.]</p>
			<p>In the year 679,
			Aelfwine was killed. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXI">IV, 21</a>.]</p>
			<p>In the year 680,
			a synod was held in the plain of Haethfelth, concerning the
			Catholic faith, Archbishop Theodore presiding; John, the Roman
			abbot, was also present. The same year also the Abbess Hilda died
			at Streanaeshalch. [IV, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XVII">17</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XVIII">18</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXIII">23</a>.]</p>
			<p>In the year 685,
			Egfrid, king of the Northumbrians, was slain. The same year
			Hlothere, king of Kent, died. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_IV_Chap_XXVI">IV, 26</a>.]</p>
			<p>In the year 688,
			Caedwald, king of the West Saxons, went to Rome from Britain.
			[<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_VII">V, 7</a>.]</p>
			<p>In the year 690,
			Archbishop Theodore died. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_VIII">V, 8</a>.]</p>
			<p>In the year 697,
			Queen Osthryth was murdered by her own nobles, to wit, the nobles
			of the Mercians.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1037" id="noteref-1037" epub:type="noteref">1037</a></p>
			<p>In the year 698,
			Berctred, an ealdorman of the king of the Northumbrians, was slain
			by the Picts.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1038" id="noteref-1038" epub:type="noteref">1038</a></p>
			<p>In the year 704,
			Ethelred, after he had reigned thirty-one years over the nation of
			the Mercians, became a monk, and gave up the kingdom to Coenred.
			[<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XIX">V, 19</a>.]<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1039" id="noteref-1039" epub:type="noteref">1039</a></p>
			<p>In the year 705,
			Aldfrid, king of the Northumbrians, died. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XVIII">V, 18</a>.]</p>
			<p>In the year 709,
			Coenred, king of the Mercians, having reigned five years, went to
			Rome. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XIX">V,
			19</a>.]</p>
			<p>In the year 711,
			the commander Bertfrid fought with the Picts.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1040" id="noteref-1040" epub:type="noteref">1040</a></p><!--Page 386-->
			<p>In the year 716,
			Osred, king of the Northumbrians, was killed; and Ceolred, king of
			the Mercians, died; and the man of God, Egbert, brought the monks
			of Hii to observe the Catholic Easter and the ecclesiastical
			tonsure. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXII">V,
			22</a>.]</p>
			<p>In the year 725,
			Wictred, king of Kent, died. [<a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Book_V_Chap_XXIII">V, 23</a>.]</p>
			<p>In the year 729,
			comets appeared; the holy Egbert passed away; and Osric died.
			[<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ibid.</span></span>]</p>
			<p>In the year 731,
			Archbishop Bertwald died. [<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ibid.</span></span>]</p>
			<p>The same year
			Tatwine was consecrated ninth archbishop of the church of
			Canterbury, in the fifteenth year of the reign of Ethelbald, king
			of the Mercians. [<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ibid.</span></span>]</p>
			<div class="tei tei-tb">
			<hr style="width: 50%"/>
			</div>
			<p>Thus much of the
			Ecclesiastical History of Britain, and more especially of the
			English nation, as far as I could learn either from the writings of
			the ancients, or the tradition of our forefathers, or of my own
			knowledge, with the help of the Lord, I, Bede,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1041" id="noteref-1041" epub:type="noteref">1041</a> the
			servant of Christ, and priest of the monastery of the blessed
			Apostles, Peter and Paul, which is at Wearmouth and Jarrow,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1042" id="noteref-1042" epub:type="noteref">1042</a> have
			set forth. Having been born in the territory of that same
			monastery, I was given, by the care of kinsmen, at seven years of
			age, to be educated by the most reverend Abbot Benedict,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1043" id="noteref-1043" epub:type="noteref">1043</a> and
			afterwards by Ceolfrid,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1044" id="noteref-1044" epub:type="noteref">1044</a> and
			spending all the remaining time of my life a dweller in that
			monastery, I wholly applied myself to the study of Scripture; and
			amidst the observance of monastic rule, and the daily charge of
			singing in the church, I always took delight in learning, or
			teaching, or writing. In the nineteenth year of my age, I received
			deacon's orders; in the thirtieth, those of the priesthood, both of
			them by the ministry of the most reverend Bishop John,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1045" id="noteref-1045" epub:type="noteref">1045</a> and
			at <!--Page 387-->the bidding of the
			Abbot Ceolfrid. From the time when I received priest's orders, till
			the fifty-ninth year of my age, I have made it my business, for my
			own needs and those of my brethren, to compile out of the works of
			the venerable Fathers, the following brief notes on the Holy
			Scriptures, and also to make some additions after the manner of the
			meaning and interpretation given by them:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1046" id="noteref-1046" epub:type="noteref">1046</a></p>
			<p>On the Beginning
			of Genesis, to the birth of Isaac and the casting out of Ishmael,
			four books.</p>
			<p>Concerning the
			Tabernacle and its Vessels, and of the Vestments of the Priests,
			three books.</p>
			<p>On the first
			part of Samuel, to the Death of Saul, three books.</p>
			<p>Concerning the
			Building of the Temple, of Allegorical Exposition, and other
			matters, two books.</p>
			<p>Likewise on the
			Book of Kings, thirty Questions.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1047" id="noteref-1047" epub:type="noteref">1047</a></p>
			<p>On the Proverbs
			of Solomon, three books.</p>
			<p>On the Song of
			Songs, seven books.</p>
			<p>On Isaiah,
			Daniel, the twelve Prophets, and Part of Jeremiah, Divisions of
			Chapters, collected from the Treatise of the blessed Jerome.</p>
			<p>On Ezra and
			Nehemiah, three books.</p>
			<p>On the song of
			Habakkuk, one book.</p>
			<p>On the Book of
			the blessed Father Tobias, one Book of Allegorical Explanation
			concerning Christ and the Church.</p>
			<p>Also, Chapters
			of Readings on the Pentateuch of Moses, Joshua, and
			Judges;</p><!--Page 388-->
			<p>On the Books of
			Kings and Chronicles;</p>
			<p>On the Book of
			the blessed Father Job;</p>
			<p>On the
			Proverbs,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1048" id="noteref-1048" epub:type="noteref">1048</a>
			Ecclesiastes, and the Song of Songs;</p>
			<p>On the Prophets
			Isaiah, Ezra, and Nehemiah.</p>
			<p>On the Gospel of
			Mark, four books.</p>
			<p>On the Gospel of
			Luke, six books.</p>
			<p>Of Homilies on
			the Gospel, two books.</p>
			<p>On the
			Apostle,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1049" id="noteref-1049" epub:type="noteref">1049</a>
			whatsoever I have found in the works of St. Augustine I have taken
			heed to transcribe in order.</p>
			<p>On the Acts of
			the Apostles, two books.</p>
			<p>On the seven
			Catholic Epistles, a book on each.</p>
			<p>On the
			Revelation of St. John, three books.</p>
			<p>Likewise,
			Chapters of Lessons on all the New Testament, except the
			Gospel.</p>
			<p>Likewise a book
			of Epistles to divers Persons, of which one is of the Six Ages of
			the world; one of the Halting-places of the Children of Israel; one
			on the words of Isaiah, <span class="tei tei-q">“And they shall be
			shut up in the prison, and after many days shall they be
			visited”</span>;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1050" id="noteref-1050" epub:type="noteref">1050</a> one
			of the Reason of Leap-Year, and one of the Equinox, according to
			Anatolius.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1051" id="noteref-1051" epub:type="noteref">1051</a></p>
			<p>Likewise
			concerning the Histories of Saints: I translated the Book of the
			Life and Passion of St. Felix, Confessor,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1052" id="noteref-1052" epub:type="noteref">1052</a> from
			the metrical work of Paulinus, into prose; the Book of the Life and
			Passion of St. Anastasius,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1053" id="noteref-1053" epub:type="noteref">1053</a>
			which was ill translated from the Greek, and worse amended by some
			ignorant person, I have corrected as to the sense as far as I
			could; I have written the Life of <!--Page 389-->the Holy Father Cuthbert,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1054" id="noteref-1054" epub:type="noteref">1054</a> who
			was both monk and bishop, first in heroic verse, and afterwards in
			prose.</p>
			<p>The History of
			the Abbots of this monastery, in which I rejoice to serve the
			Divine Goodness, to wit, Benedict, Ceolfrid, and Huaetbert,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1055" id="noteref-1055" epub:type="noteref">1055</a> in
			two books.</p>
			<p>The
			Ecclesiastical History of our Island and Nation, in five books.</p>
			<p>The Martyrology
			of the Festivals of the Holy Martyrs, in which I have carefully
			endeavoured to set down all whom I could find, and not only on what
			day, but also by what sort of combat, and under what judge they
			overcame the world.</p>
			<p>A Book of Hymns
			in divers sorts of metre, or rhythm.</p>
			<p>A Book of
			Epigrams in heroic or elegiac verse.</p>
			<p>Of the Nature of
			Things, and of the Times, one book of each; likewise, of the Times,
			one larger book.</p>
			<p>A book of
			Orthography arranged in Alphabetical Order.</p>
			<p>Likewise a Book
			of the Art of Poetry, and to it I have added another little Book of
			Figures of Speech or Tropes; that is, of the Figures and Modes of
			Speech in which the Holy Scriptures are written.</p>
			<p>And I beseech
			Thee, good Jesus, that to whom Thou hast graciously granted sweetly
			to drink in the words of Thy knowledge, Thou wilt also vouchsafe in
			Thy loving-kindness that he may one day come to Thee, the Fountain
			of all wisdom, and appear for ever before Thy face.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
