<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-3" id="chapter-3-30" epub:type="chapter">
			<!--Page 212-->
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">How the East Saxons, during a pestilence, returned to idolatry, but were soon brought back from their error by the zeal of Bishop Jaruman. [665 a.d.]</p>
			</header>
			<p>At the same
			time, the Kings Sighere and Sebbi,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-512" id="noteref-512" epub:type="noteref">512</a>
			though themselves subject to Wulfhere, king of the Mercians,
			governed the province of the East Saxons after Suidhelm, of whom we
			have spoken above.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-513" id="noteref-513" epub:type="noteref">513</a> When
			that province was suffering from the aforesaid disastrous plague,
			Sighere, with his part of the people, forsook the mysteries of the
			Christian faith, and turned apostate. For the king himself, and
			many of the commons and nobles, loving this life, and not seeking
			after another, or even not believing in any other, began to restore
			the temples that had been abandoned, and to adore idols, as if they
			might by those means be protected against the plague. But Sebbi,
			his companion and co-heir in the kingdom, with all his people, very
			devoutly preserved the faith which he had received, and, as we
			shall show hereafter, ended his faithful life in great
			felicity.</p>
			<p>King Wulfhere,
			hearing that the faith of the province was in part profaned, sent
			Bishop Jaruman,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-514" id="noteref-514" epub:type="noteref">514</a> who
			was successor to Trumhere, to correct their error, and recall the
			province to the true faith. He acted with much discretion, as I was
			informed by a priest who bore him company in that journey, and had
			been his fellow labourer in the Word, for he was a religious and
			good man, and travelling through all the country, far and near,
			brought back both the people and the aforesaid king to the way of
			righteousness, so that, either forsaking or destroying the temples
			and altars which they had erected, they opened the churches, and
			gladly confessed the Name of Christ, which they had opposed,
			choosing rather to die in the faith of resurrection in Him, than to
			live in the abominations of unbelief among their idols. Having thus
			accomplished their works, the priests and teachers returned home
			with joy.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
