<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-4" id="chapter-4-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">How Bishop Colman, having left Britain, built two monasteries in the country of the Scots; the one for the Scots, the other for the English whom he had taken along with him. [667 a.d.]</p>
			</header>
			<p>In the meantime,
			Colman, the Scottish bishop, departing from Britain,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-556" id="noteref-556" epub:type="noteref">556</a> took
			along with him all the Scots whom he had gathered about him in the
			isle of Lindisfarne, and also about thirty of the English nation,
			for both these companies had been trained in duties of the monastic
			life; and leaving some brothers in his church, he went first to the
			isle of Hii,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-557" id="noteref-557" epub:type="noteref">557</a>
			whence he had been sent to preach the Word of God to the English
			nation. Afterwards he retired to a small island, which is to the
			west of Ireland, and at some distance from it, called in the
			language of the Scots, Inisboufinde,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-558" id="noteref-558" epub:type="noteref">558</a> the
			Island of the White Heifer. Arriving there, he built a monastery,
			and placed in it the monks he had brought of both nations. But they
			could not agree among themselves, by reason that the Scots, in the
			summer season, when the harvest was to be brought in, leaving the
			monastery, wandered about through places known to them; but
			returned again the next winter, and desired to use in common what
			the English had provided. Colman sought to put an end to this
			dissension, and travelling about far and near, he found a place in
			the island of Ireland fitted to be the site of a monastery, which,
			in the language of the <!--Page 226-->
			Scots, is called Mageo.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-559" id="noteref-559" epub:type="noteref">559</a> He
			bought a small part of it of the chief to whom it belonged, to
			build his monastery thereon; upon condition, that the monks
			dwelling there should pray to the Lord for him who let them have
			the place. Then at once building a monastery, with the assistance
			of the chief and all the neighbouring people, he placed the English
			there, leaving the Scots in the aforesaid island. This monastery is
			to this day occupied by English inhabitants; being the same that,
			grown from a small beginning to be very large, is commonly called
			Muigeo; and as all have long since been brought to adopt better
			customs, it contains a notable society of monks, who are gathered
			there from the province of the English, and live by the labour of
			their own hands, after the example of the venerable fathers, under
			a rule and a canonical abbot, in much continence and singleness of
			life.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
