<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-1" id="chapter-1-23" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">How the holy Pope Gregory sent Augustine, with other monks, to preach to the English nation, and encouraged them by a letter of exhortation, not to desist from their labour. [596 a.d.]</p>
			</header>
			<p>In the year of
			our Lord 582, Maurice, the fifty-fourth from Augustus, ascended the
			throne, and reigned twenty-one years. In the tenth year of his
			reign, Gregory,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-104" id="noteref-104" epub:type="noteref">104</a> a man
			eminent in learning and the conduct of affairs, was promoted to the
			Apostolic see of Rome, and presided over it thirteen years, six
			months and ten days. He, being moved by Divine inspiration, in the
			fourteenth year of the same emperor, and about the one hundred and
			fiftieth after the coming of the English into Britain, sent the
			servant of God, Augustine,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-105" id="noteref-105" epub:type="noteref">105</a> and
			with him divers other monks, who feared the Lord, to preach the
			Word of God to the English nation. They having, in obedience
			<!--Page 043-->to the pope's
			commands, undertaken that work, when they had gone but a little way
			on their journey, were seized with craven terror, and began to
			think of returning home, rather than proceed to a barbarous,
			fierce, and unbelieving nation, to whose very language they were
			strangers; and by common consent they decided that this was the
			safer course. At once Augustine, who had been appointed to be
			consecrated bishop, if they should be received by the English, was
			sent back, that he might, by humble entreaty, obtain of the blessed
			Gregory, that they should not be compelled to undertake so
			dangerous, toilsome, and uncertain a journey. The pope, in reply,
			sent them a letter of exhortation, persuading them to set forth to
			the work of the Divine Word, and rely on the help of God. The
			purport of which letter was as follows:</p>
			<p><span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Gregory, the servant of the servants of God,
			to the servants of our Lord.</span></span> Forasmuch as it had been
			better not to begin a good work, than to think of desisting from
			one which has been begun, it behoves you, my beloved sons, to
			fulfil with all diligence the good work, which, by the help of the
			Lord, you have undertaken. Let not, therefore, the toil of the
			journey, nor the tongues of evil-speaking men, discourage you; but
			with all earnestness and zeal perform, by God's guidance, that
			which you have set about; being assured, that great labour is
			followed by the greater glory of an eternal reward. When Augustine,
			your Superior, returns, whom we also constitute your abbot, humbly
			obey him in all things; knowing, that whatsoever you shall do by
			his direction, will, in all respects, be profitable to your souls.
			Almighty God protect you with His grace, and grant that I may, in
			the heavenly country, see the fruits of your labour, inasmuch as,
			though I cannot labour with you, I shall partake in the joy of the
			reward, because I am willing to labour. God keep you in safety, my
			most beloved sons. Given the 23rd of July, in the fourteenth year
			of the reign of our most religious lord, Mauritius Tiberius
			Augustus, the thirteenth year after the consulship of our lord
			aforesaid, and the fourteenth indiction.”</span><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-106" id="noteref-106" epub:type="noteref">106</a></p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
