<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-1" id="chapter-1-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<!--Page 011-->
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">How Claudius, the second of the Romans who came into Britain, brought the islands Orcades into subjection to the Roman empire; and Vespasian, sent by him, reduced the Isle of Wight under the dominion of the Romans.</p>
			</header>
			<p>In the year of
			Rome 798,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-38" id="noteref-38" epub:type="noteref">38</a>
			Claudius, fourth emperor from Augustus, being desirous to approve
			himself a prince beneficial to the republic, and eagerly bent upon
			war and conquest on every side, undertook an expedition into
			Britain, which as it appeared, was roused to rebellion by the
			refusal of the Romans to give up certain deserters. No one before
			or after Julius Caesar had dared to land upon the island. Claudius
			crossed over to it, and within a very few days, without any
			fighting or bloodshed, the greater part of the island was
			surrendered into his hands. He also added to the Roman empire the
			Orcades,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-39" id="noteref-39" epub:type="noteref">39</a> which
			lie in the ocean beyond Britain, and, returning to Rome in the
			sixth month after his departure, he gave his son the title of
			Britannicus. This war he concluded in the fourth year of his reign,
			which is the forty-sixth from the Incarnation of our Lord. In which
			year there came to pass a most grievous famine in Syria, which is
			recorded in the Acts of the Apostles to have been foretold by the
			prophet Agabus.</p>
			<p>Vespasian,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-40" id="noteref-40" epub:type="noteref">40</a> who
			was emperor after Nero, being sent into Britain by the same
			Claudius, brought also under the Roman dominion the Isle of Wight,
			which is close to Britain on the south, and is about thirty miles
			in length from east to west, and twelve from north to south; being
			six miles distant from the southern coast of Britain at the east
			end, and three at the west. Nero, succeeding Claudius in the
			empire, undertook no wars at all; and, therefore, among countless
			other disasters brought by him upon the Roman state, he almost lost
			Britain; for <!--Page 012-->
			in his time two most notable towns were there taken and
			destroyed.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
