<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-1" id="chapter-1-31" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXXI</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">How Pope Gregory, by letter, exhorted Augustine not to glory in his miracles. [601 a.d.]</p>
			</header>
			<p>At which time he
			also sent Augustine a letter concerning the miracles that he had
			heard had been wrought by him; wherein he admonishes him not to
			incur the danger of being puffed up by the number of them. The
			letter was in these words:</p>
			<p><span class="tei tei-q">“I know, dearly beloved brother, that Almighty God, by
			means of you, shows forth great miracles to the nation which it was
			His will to choose. Wherefore you must needs rejoice with fear, and
			fear with joy concerning that heavenly gift; for you will rejoice
			because the souls of the English are by outward miracles drawn to
			inward grace; but you will fear, lest, amidst the wonders that are
			wrought, the weak mind may be puffed up with self-esteem, and that
			whereby it is outwardly raised to honour cause it inwardly to fall
			through vain-glory. For we must call to mind, that when the
			disciples returned with joy from preaching, and said to their
			Heavenly Master, <span class="tei tei-q">‘Lord, even the devils are
			subject to us through Thy Name;’</span> forthwith they received the
			reply, <span class="tei tei-q">‘In this rejoice not; but rather
			rejoice, because your names are written in heaven.’</span><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-134" id="noteref-134" epub:type="noteref">134</a> For
			their minds were set on private and temporal joys, when they
			rejoiced in miracles; but they are recalled from the private to the
			common <!--Page 069-->
			joy, and from the temporal to the eternal, when it is said to them,
			<span class="tei tei-q">‘Rejoice in this, because your names are
			written in heaven.’</span> For all the elect do not work miracles,
			and yet the names of all are written in heaven. For those who are
			disciples of the truth ought not to rejoice, save for that good
			thing which all men enjoy as well as they, and in which their joy
			shall be without end.</span></p>
			<p><span class="tei tei-q">“It remains, therefore, most dear brother, that amidst
			those outward actions, which you perform through the power of the
			Lord, you should always carefully judge yourself in your heart, and
			carefully understand both what you are yourself, and how much grace
			is bestowed upon that same nation, for the conversion of which you
			have received even the gift of working miracles. And if you
			remember that you have at any time sinned against our Creator,
			either by word or deed, always call it to mind, to the end that the
			remembrance of your guilt may crush the vanity which rises in your
			heart. And whatsoever gift of working miracles you either shall
			receive, or have received, consider the same, not as conferred on
			you, but on those for whose salvation it has been given
			you.”</span></p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
