<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-4" id="chapter-4-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<!--Page 213-->
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">How when Deusdedit died, Wighard was sent to Rome to receive the episcopate; but he dying there, Theodore was ordained archbishop, and sent into Britain with the Abbot Hadrian. [664-669 a.d.]</p>
			</header>
			<p>In the
			above-mentioned year of the aforesaid eclipse<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-515" id="noteref-515" epub:type="noteref">515</a> and
			of the pestilence which followed it immediately, in which also
			Bishop Colman, being overcome by the united effort of the
			Catholics, returned home,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-516" id="noteref-516" epub:type="noteref">516</a>
			Deusdedit,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-517" id="noteref-517" epub:type="noteref">517</a> the
			sixth bishop of the church of Canterbury, died on the 14th of July.
			Earconbert,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-518" id="noteref-518" epub:type="noteref">518</a> also,
			king of Kent, departed this life the same month and day; leaving
			his kingdom to his son Egbert, who held it for nine years. The see
			then became vacant for no small time, until, the priest
			Wighard,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-519" id="noteref-519" epub:type="noteref">519</a> a man
			of great learning in the teaching of the Church, of the English
			race, was sent to Rome by King Egbert and Oswy, king of the
			Northumbrians, as was briefly mentioned in the foregoing
			book,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-520" id="noteref-520" epub:type="noteref">520</a> with
			a request that he might be ordained Archbishop of the Church of
			England; and at the same time presents were sent to the Apostolic
			pope, and many vessels of gold and silver. Arriving at Rome, where
			Vitalian<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-521" id="noteref-521" epub:type="noteref">521</a>
			presided at that time over the Apostolic see, and having made known
			to the aforesaid Apostolic pope the occasion of his journey, he was
			not long after carried off, with almost all his companions who had
			come with him, by a pestilence which fell upon them.</p>
			<p>But the
			Apostolic pope having consulted about that matter, made diligent
			inquiry for some one to send to be <!--Page 214-->archbishop of the English Churches. There was
			then in the monastery of Niridanum, which is not far from Naples in
			Campania, an abbot called Hadrian,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-522" id="noteref-522" epub:type="noteref">522</a> by
			nation an African, well versed in Holy Scripture, trained in
			monastic and ecclesiastical teaching, and excellently skilled both
			in the Greek and Latin tongues. The pope, sending for him,
			commanded him to accept the bishopric and go to Britain. He
			answered, that he was unworthy of so great a dignity, but said that
			he could name another, whose learning and age were fitter for the
			episcopal office. He proposed to the pope a certain monk named
			Andrew, belonging to a neighbouring nunnery<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-523" id="noteref-523" epub:type="noteref">523</a> and
			he was by all that knew him judged worthy of a bishopric; but the
			weight of bodily infirmity prevented him from becoming a bishop.
			Then again Hadrian was urged to accept the episcopate; but he
			desired a respite, to see whether in time he could find another to
			be ordained bishop.</p>
			<p>There was at
			that time in Rome, a monk, called Theodore,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-524" id="noteref-524" epub:type="noteref">524</a> known
			to Hadrian, born at Tarsus in Cilicia, a man instructed in secular
			and Divine writings, as also in Greek and Latin; of high character
			and venerable age, being sixty-six years old. Hadrian proposed him
			to the pope to be ordained bishop, and prevailed; but upon the
			condition that he should himself conduct him into Britain, because
			he had already travelled through Gaul twice upon different
			occasions, and was, therefore, better acquainted with the way, and
			was, moreover, sufficiently provided with men of his own; as also,
			to the end that, being his fellow labourer in teaching, he might
			take special care that Theodore should not, according to the custom
			of the Greeks, introduce any thing contrary to the truth of the
			faith into the Church where he presided.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-525" id="noteref-525" epub:type="noteref">525</a>
			Theodore, being ordained subdeacon, waited four months for his hair
			to grow, that it might be shorn into the shape of a <!--Page 215-->crown; for he had before the tonsure of
			St. Paul,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-526" id="noteref-526" epub:type="noteref">526</a> the
			Apostle, after the manner of the eastern people. He was ordained by
			Pope Vitalian, in the year of our Lord 668, on Sunday, the 26th of
			March, and on the 27th of May was sent with Hadrian to
			Britain.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-527" id="noteref-527" epub:type="noteref">527</a></p>
			<p>They proceeded
			together by sea to Marseilles, and thence by land to Arles, and
			having there delivered to John, archbishop of that city,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-528" id="noteref-528" epub:type="noteref">528</a> Pope
			Vitalian's letters of recommendation, were by him detained till
			Ebroin,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-529" id="noteref-529" epub:type="noteref">529</a> the
			king's mayor of the palace, gave them leave to go where they
			pleased. Having received the same, Theodore went to Agilbert,
			bishop of Paris,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-530" id="noteref-530" epub:type="noteref">530</a> of
			whom we have spoken above, and was by him kindly received, and long
			entertained. But Hadrian went first to Emme, Bishop of the
			Senones,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-531" id="noteref-531" epub:type="noteref">531</a> and
			then to Faro,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-532" id="noteref-532" epub:type="noteref">532</a>
			bishop of the Meldi, and lived in comfort with them a considerable
			time; for the approach of winter had obliged them to rest wherever
			they could. King Egbert, being informed by sure messengers that the
			bishop they had asked of the Roman prelate was in the kingdom of
			the Franks, sent thither his reeve,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-533" id="noteref-533" epub:type="noteref">533</a>
			Raedfrid, to conduct him. He, having arrived there, with Ebroin's
			leave took Theodore and conveyed him to the port called
			Quentavic;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-534" id="noteref-534" epub:type="noteref">534</a>
			where, falling sick, <!--Page 216-->
			he stayed some time, and as soon as he began to recover, sailed
			over into Britain. But Ebroin detained Hadrian, suspecting that he
			went on some mission from the Emperor to the kings of Britain, to
			the prejudice of the kingdom of which he at that time had the chief
			charge; however, when he found that in truth he had never had any
			such commission, he discharged him, and permitted him to follow
			Theodore. As soon as he came to him, Theodore gave him the
			monastery of the blessed Peter the Apostle,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-535" id="noteref-535" epub:type="noteref">535</a> where
			the archbishops of Canterbury are wont to be buried, as I have said
			before; for at his departure, the Apostolic lord had enjoined upon
			Theodore that he should provide for him in his province, and give
			him a suitable place to live in with his followers.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
