<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-5" id="chapter-5-18" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">How the South Saxons received Eadbert and Eolla, and the West Saxons, Daniel and Aldhelm, for their bishops; and of the writings of the same Aldhelm. [705 a.d.]</p>
			</header>
			<p>In the year of
			our Lord 705, Aldfrid, king of the Northumbrians, died<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-867" id="noteref-867" epub:type="noteref">867</a>
			before the end of the twentieth year of his reign. His son
			Osred,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-868" id="noteref-868" epub:type="noteref">868</a> a boy
			about eight years of age, succeeding him in the throne, reigned
			eleven years. In the beginning of his reign, Haedde, bishop of the
			West Saxons,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-869" id="noteref-869" epub:type="noteref">869</a>
			departed to the heavenly life; for he was a good man and a just,
			and his life and doctrine as a bishop were guided rather by his
			innate love of virtue, than by what he had gained from books. The
			most <!--Page 343-->reverend bishop,
			Pechthelm, of whom we shall speak hereafter in the proper
			place,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-870" id="noteref-870" epub:type="noteref">870</a> and
			who while still deacon or monk was for a long time with his
			successor Aldhelm,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-871" id="noteref-871" epub:type="noteref">871</a> was
			wont to relate that many miracles of healing have been wrought in
			the place where he died, through the merit of his sanctity; and
			that the men of that province used to carry the dust thence for the
			sick, and put it into water, and the drinking thereof, or
			sprinkling with it, brought health to many sick men and beasts; so
			that the holy dust being frequently carried away, a great hole was
			made there.</p>
			<p>Upon his death,
			the bishopric of that province was divided into two dioceses.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-872" id="noteref-872" epub:type="noteref">872</a> One
			of them was given to <!--Page 344-->
			Daniel,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-873" id="noteref-873" epub:type="noteref">873</a> which
			he governs to this day; the other to Aldhelm, wherein he presided
			most vigorously four years; both of them were fully instructed, as
			well in matters touching the Church as in the knowledge of the
			Scriptures. Aldhelm, when he was as yet only a priest and abbot of
			the monastery which is called the city of Maildufus,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-874" id="noteref-874" epub:type="noteref">874</a> by
			order of a synod of his own nation, wrote a notable book<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-875" id="noteref-875" epub:type="noteref">875</a>
			against the error of the Britons, in not celebrating Easter at the
			due time, and in doing divers other things contrary to the purity
			of doctrine and the peace of the church; and through the reading of
			this book many of the Britons, who were subject to the West Saxons,
			were led by him to adopt the Catholic celebration of our Lord's
			Paschal Feast. He likewise wrote a famous book on Virginity,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-876" id="noteref-876" epub:type="noteref">876</a>
			which, after the example of Sedulius,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-877" id="noteref-877" epub:type="noteref">877</a> he
			composed in twofold form, in hexameters and in prose. He wrote some
			other books, being a man most instructed in all respects, for he
			had a polished style,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-878" id="noteref-878" epub:type="noteref">878</a> and
			was, as I have said, of marvellous learning both in liberal and
			ecclesiastical studies. On his death, Forthere<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-879" id="noteref-879" epub:type="noteref">879</a>
			<!--Page 345-->was made bishop in
			his stead, and is living at this time, being likewise a man very
			learned in the Holy Scriptures.</p>
			<p>Whilst they
			administered the bishopric, it was determined by a synodal decree,
			that the province of the South Saxons, which till that time
			belonged to the diocese of the city of Winchester, where Daniel
			then presided, should itself have an episcopal see, and a bishop of
			its own.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-880" id="noteref-880" epub:type="noteref">880</a>
			Eadbert, at that time abbot of the monastery of Bishop Wilfrid, of
			blessed memory, called Selaeseu,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-881" id="noteref-881" epub:type="noteref">881</a> was
			consecrated their first bishop. On his death, Eolla succeeded to
			the office of bishop. He also died some years ago, and the
			bishopric has been vacant to this day.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-882" id="noteref-882" epub:type="noteref">882</a></p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
