<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-3" id="chapter-3-25" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">How the question arose about the due time of keeping Easter, with those that came out of Scotland.<a class="pginternal" href="#note_454" id="noteref_454"><span class="tei tei-noteref" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">454</span></span></a>[664 a.d.]</p>
			</header>
			<!--
			<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
			<span style="font-size: 144%">Chap. XXV. How the question arose
			about the due time of keeping Easter, with those that came out of
			Scotland.</span><a href="#note_454" id="noteref_454" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">454</span></span></a><span style="font-size: 144%">[664</span>
			<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 144%; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-size: 144%">]</span></h2>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the meantime,
			Bishop Aidan being taken away from this life, Finan, who was
			ordained and sent by the Scots, succeeded him in the bishopric, and
			built a church in the Isle of Lindisfarne, fit for the episcopal
			see; nevertheless, after the manner of the Scots, he made it, not
			of stone, but entirely of hewn oak, and covered it with reeds; and
			it was afterwards dedicated in honour of the blessed Peter the
			Apostle, by the most reverend Archbishop Theodore. Eadbert,<a href="#note_455" id="noteref_455" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">455</span></span></a> also
			bishop of that place, took off the thatch, and caused it to be
			covered entirely, both roof and walls, with plates of
			lead.</p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page193">[pg
			193]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg193"/>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At this time, a
			great and frequently debated question arose about the observance of
			Easter;<a href="#note_456" id="noteref_456" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">456</span></span></a> those
			that came from Kent or Gaul affirming, that the Scots celebrated
			Easter Sunday contrary to the custom of the universal Church. Among
			them was a most zealous defender of the true Easter, whose name was
			Ronan,<a href="#note_457" id="noteref_457" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">457</span></span></a> a
			Scot by nation, but instructed in the rule of ecclesiastical truth
			in Gaul or Italy. Disputing with Finan, he convinced many, or at
			least induced them to make a more strict inquiry after the truth;
			yet he could not prevail upon Finan, but, on the contrary,
			embittered him the more by reproof, and made him a professed
			opponent of the truth, for he was of a violent temper. James,<a href="#note_458" id="noteref_458" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">458</span></span></a>
			formerly the deacon of the venerable Archbishop Paulinus, as has
			been said above, observed the true and Catholic Easter, with all
			those that he could instruct in the better way. Queen Eanfled and
			her followers also observed it as she had seen it practised in
			Kent, having with her a Kentish priest who followed the Catholic
			observance, whose name was Romanus. Thus it is said to have
			sometimes happened in those times that Easter was twice celebrated
			in one year; and that when the king, having ended his fast, was
			keeping Easter, the queen and her followers were still fasting, and
			celebrating Palm Sunday. Whilst Aidan lived, this difference about
			the observance of Easter was patiently tolerated by all men, for
			they well knew, that though he could not keep Easter contrary to
			the custom of those who had sent him, yet he industriously laboured
			to practise the works of faith, piety, and love, according to the
			custom of all holy men; for which reason he was deservedly beloved
			by all, even by those who differed in opinion concerning Easter,
			and was held in veneration, not only by less important persons, but
			even by the bishops, Honorius of Canterbury, and Felix of the East
			Angles.</p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But after the
			death of Finan, who succeeded him, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page194">[pg 194]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg194"/> when Colman, who was also sent from
			Scotland,<a href="#note_459" id="noteref_459" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">459</span></span></a> came
			to be bishop, a greater controversy arose about the observance of
			Easter, and other rules of ecclesiastical life. Whereupon this
			question began naturally to influence the thoughts and hearts of
			many who feared, lest haply, having received the name of
			Christians, they might run, or have run, in vain. This reached the
			ears of the rulers, King Oswy and his son Alchfrid. Now Oswy,
			having been instructed and baptized by the Scots, and being very
			perfectly skilled in their language, thought nothing better than
			what they taught; but Alchfrid, having for his teacher in
			Christianity the learned Wilfrid,<a href="#note_460" id="noteref_460" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">460</span></span></a> who
			had formerly gone to Rome to study ecclesiastical doctrine, and
			spent much time at Lyons with Dalfinus,<a href="#note_461" id="noteref_461" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">461</span></span></a>
			archbishop of Gaul, from whom also he had received the crown of
			ecclesiastical tonsure, rightly thought that this man's doctrine
			ought to be preferred before all the traditions of the Scots. For
			this reason he had also given him a monastery of forty families, at
			a place called Inhrypum;<a href="#note_462" id="noteref_462" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">462</span></span></a> which
			place, not long before, he had given for a monastery to those that
			were followers of the Scots; but forasmuch as they afterwards,
			being left to their choice, preferred to quit the place rather than
			alter their custom, he gave it to him, whose life and doctrine were
			worthy of it.</p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Agilbert, bishop
			of the West Saxons,<a href="#note_463" id="noteref_463" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">463</span></span></a>
			above-mentioned, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page195">[pg
			195]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg195"/> a
			friend of King Alchfrid and of Abbot Wilfrid, had at that time come
			into the province of the Northumbrians, and was staying some time
			among them; at the request of Alchfrid, he made Wilfrid a priest in
			his aforesaid monastery. He had in his company a priest, whose name
			was Agatho.<a href="#note_464" id="noteref_464" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">464</span></span></a> The
			question being raised there concerning Easter and the tonsure and
			other ecclesiastical matters, it was arranged, that a synod should
			be held in the monastery of Streanaeshalch,<a href="#note_465" id="noteref_465" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">465</span></span></a> which
			signifies the Bay of the Lighthouse, where the Abbess Hilda,<a href="#note_466" id="noteref_466" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">466</span></span></a> a
			woman devoted to the service of God, then ruled; and that there
			this question should be decided. The kings, both father and son,
			came thither, and the bishops, Colman with his Scottish clerks, and
			Agilbert with the priests Agatho and Wilfrid. James and Romanus
			were on their side; but the Abbess Hilda and her followers were for
			the Scots, as was also the venerable Bishop Cedd,<a href="#note_467" id="noteref_467" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">467</span></span></a> long
			before ordained by the Scots, as has been said above, and he acted
			in that council as a most careful interpreter for both parties.</p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">King Oswy first
			made an opening speech, in which he said that it behoved those who
			served one God to observe one rule of life; and as they all
			expected the same kingdom in heaven, so they ought not to differ in
			the celebration of the heavenly mysteries; but rather to inquire
			which was the truer tradition, that it might be followed by all in
			common; he then commanded his bishop, Colman, first to declare what
			the custom was which he observed, and whence it derived its origin.
			Then Colman said, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Easter which I keep,
			I received from my elders, who sent me hither as bishop; all our
			forefathers, men beloved of God, are known to have celebrated it
			after the same manner; and that it may not seem to any contemptible
			and worthy to be <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page196">[pg
			196]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg196"/>
			rejected, it is the same which the blessed John the Evangelist, the
			disciple specially beloved of our Lord, with all the churches over
			which he presided, is recorded to have celebrated.”</span><a href="#note_468" id="noteref_468" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">468</span></span></a> When
			he had said thus much, and more to the like effect, the king
			commanded Agilbert to make known the manner of his observance and
			to show whence it was derived, and on what authority he followed
			it. Agilbert answered, <span class="tei tei-q">“I beseech you, let
			my disciple, the priest Wilfrid, speak in my stead; because we both
			concur with the other followers of the ecclesiastical tradition
			that are here present, and he can better and more clearly explain
			our opinion in the English language, than I can by an
			interpreter.”</span></p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Then Wilfrid,
			being ordered by the king to speak, began thus:—<span class="tei tei-q">“The Easter which we keep, we saw celebrated by all at
			Rome, where the blessed Apostles, Peter and Paul, lived, taught,
			suffered, and were buried; we saw the same done by all in Italy and
			in Gaul, when we travelled through those countries for the purpose
			of study and prayer. We found it observed in Africa, Asia, Egypt,
			Greece, and all the world, wherever the Church of Christ is spread
			abroad, among divers nations and tongues, at one and the same time;
			save only among these and their accomplices in obstinacy, I mean
			the Picts and the Britons, who foolishly, in these two remote
			islands of the ocean, and only in part even of them, strive to
			oppose all the rest of the world.”</span> When he had so said,
			Colman answered, <span class="tei tei-q">“It is strange that you
			choose to call our efforts foolish, wherein we follow the example
			of so great an Apostle, who was thought worthy to lean on our
			Lord's bosom, when all the world knows him to have lived most
			wisely.”</span> Wilfrid replied, <span class="tei tei-q">“Far be it
			from us to charge John with folly, for he literally observed the
			precepts of the Mosaic Law, whilst the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page197">[pg 197]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg197"/> Church was still Jewish in many points, and
			the Apostles, lest they should give cause of offence to the Jews
			who were among the Gentiles, were not able at once to cast off all
			the observances of the Law which had been instituted by God, in the
			same way as it is necessary that all who come to the faith should
			forsake the idols which were invented by devils. For this reason it
			was, that Paul circumcised Timothy,<a href="#note_469" id="noteref_469" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">469</span></span></a> that
			he offered sacrifice in the temple,<a href="#note_470" id="noteref_470" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">470</span></span></a> that
			he shaved his head with Aquila and Priscilla at Corinth;<a href="#note_471" id="noteref_471" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">471</span></span></a> for
			no other advantage than to avoid giving offence to the Jews. Hence
			it was, that James said to the same Paul, <span class="tei tei-q">‘Thou seest, brother, how many thousands of Jews there
			are which believe; and they are all zealous of the
			Law.’</span><a href="#note_472" id="noteref_472" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">472</span></span></a> And
			yet, at this time, when the light of the Gospel is spreading
			throughout the world, it is needless, nay, it is not lawful, for
			the faithful either to be circumcised, or to offer up to God
			sacrifices of flesh. So John, according to the custom of the Law,
			began the celebration of the feast of Easter, on the fourteenth day
			of the first month, in the evening, not regarding whether the same
			happened on a Saturday, or any other week-day. But when Peter
			preached at Rome, being mindful that our Lord arose from the dead,
			and gave to the world the hope of resurrection, on the first day of
			the week, he perceived that Easter ought to be kept after this
			manner: he always awaited the rising of the moon on the fourteenth
			day of the first month in the evening, according to the custom and
			precepts of the Law, even as John did. And when that came, if the
			Lord's day, then called the first day of the week, was the next
			day, he began that very evening to celebrate Easter, as we all do
			at the present time. But if the Lord's day did not fall the next
			morning after the fourteenth moon, but on the sixteenth, or the
			seventeenth, or any other moon till the twenty-first, he waited for
			that, and on the Saturday before, in the evening, began to observe
			the holy solemnity of Easter. Thus it came <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page198">[pg 198]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg198"/> to pass, that Easter Sunday was only kept
			from the fifteenth moon to the twenty-first. Nor does this
			evangelical and apostolic tradition abolish the Law, but rather
			fulfil it; the command being to keep the passover from the
			fourteenth moon of the first month in the evening to the
			twenty-first moon of the same month in the evening; which
			observance all the successors of the blessed John in Asia, since
			his death, and all the Church throughout the world, have since
			followed; and that this is the true Easter, and the only one to be
			celebrated by the faithful, was not newly decreed by the council of
			Nicaea, but only confirmed afresh; as the history of the Church
			informs us.<a href="#note_473" id="noteref_473" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">473</span></span></a></span></p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Thus it is plain, that you, Colman, neither follow the
			example of John, as you imagine, nor that of Peter, whose tradition
			you oppose with full knowledge, and that you neither agree with the
			Law nor the Gospel in the keeping of your Easter. For John, keeping
			the Paschal time according to the decree of the Mosaic Law, had no
			regard to the first day of the week, which you do not practise,
			seeing that you celebrate Easter only on the first day after the
			Sabbath. Peter celebrated Easter Sunday between the fifteenth and
			the twenty-first moon, which you do not practise, seeing that you
			observe Easter Sunday from the fourteenth to the twentieth moon; so
			that you often begin Easter on the thirteenth moon in the evening,
			whereof neither the Law made any mention, nor did our Lord, the
			Author and Giver of the Gospel, on that day either eat the old
			passover in the evening, or deliver the Sacraments of the New
			Testament, to be celebrated by the Church, in memory of His
			Passion, but on the fourteenth. Besides, in your celebration of
			Easter, you utterly exclude the twenty-first moon, which the Law
			ordered to be specially observed. Thus, as I have said before, you
			agree neither with John nor Peter, nor with the Law, nor the
			Gospel, in the celebration of the greatest festival.”</span></p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">To this Colman
			rejoined: <span class="tei tei-q">“Did the holy Anatolius,<a href="#note_474" id="noteref_474" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">474</span></span></a>
			<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page199">[pg 199]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg199"/> much commended in
			the history of the Church, judge contrary to the Law and the
			Gospel, when he wrote, that Easter was to be celebrated from the
			fourteenth to the twentieth moon? Is it to be believed that our
			most reverend Father Columba and his successors, men beloved by
			God, who kept Easter after the same manner, judged or acted
			contrary to the Divine writings? Whereas there were many among
			them, whose sanctity was attested by heavenly signs and miracles
			which they wrought; whom I, for my part, doubt not to be saints,
			and whose life, customs, and discipline I never cease to
			follow.”</span></p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“It is evident,”</span> said Wilfrid, <span class="tei tei-q">“that Anatolius was a most holy, learned, and
			commendable man; but what have you to do with him, since you do not
			observe his decrees? For he undoubtedly, following the rule of
			truth in his Easter, appointed a cycle of nineteen years, which
			either you are ignorant of, or if you know it, though it is kept by
			the whole Church of Christ, yet you despise it as a thing of
			naught. He so computed the fourteenth moon in our Lord's Paschal
			Feast, that according to the custom of the Egyptians, he
			acknowledged it to be the fifteenth moon on that same day in the
			evening; so in like manner he assigned the twentieth to
			Easter-Sunday, as believing that to be the twenty-first moon, when
			the sun had set. That you are ignorant of the rule of this
			distinction is proved by this, that you sometimes manifestly keep
			Easter before the full moon, that is, on the thirteenth day.
			Concerning your Father Columba and his followers, whose sanctity
			you say you imitate, and whose rule and precepts confirmed by signs
			from Heaven you say that you follow, I might answer, then when
			many, in the day of judgement, shall say to our Lord, that in His
			name they have prophesied, and have cast out devils, and done many
			wonderful works, our Lord will reply, that He never knew them. But
			far be it from me to speak thus of your fathers, for it is much
			more just to believe good than evil of those whom we know not.
			Wherefore I do not deny those also to have been God's servants, and
			beloved of God, who with rude <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page200">[pg 200]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg200"/> simplicity, but pious intentions, have
			themselves loved Him. Nor do I think that such observance of Easter
			did them much harm, as long as none came to show them a more
			perfect rule to follow; for assuredly I believe that, if any
			teacher, reckoning after the Catholic manner, had come among them,
			they would have as readily followed his admonitions, as they are
			known to have kept those commandments of God, which they had
			learned and knew.</span></p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But as for you and your companions, you certainly sin,
			if, having heard the decrees of the Apostolic see, nay, of the
			universal Church, confirmed, as they are, by Holy Scripture, you
			scorn to follow them; for, though your fathers were holy, do you
			think that those few men, in a corner of the remotest island, are
			to be preferred before the universal Church of Christ throughout
			the world? And if that Columba of yours, (and, I may say, ours
			also, if he was Christ's servant,) was a holy man and powerful in
			miracles, yet could he be preferred before the most blessed chief
			of the Apostles, to whom our Lord said, <span class="tei tei-q">‘Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my
			Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it, and I
			will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of
			Heaven?’</span> ”</span><a href="#note_475" id="noteref_475" class="pginternal"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">475</span></span></a></p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">When Wilfrid had
			ended thus, the king said, <span class="tei tei-q">“Is it true,
			Colman, that these words were spoken to Peter by our Lord?”</span>
			He answered, <span class="tei tei-q">“It is true, O king!”</span>
			Then said he, <span class="tei tei-q">“Can you show any such power
			given to your Columba?”</span> Colman answered, <span class="tei tei-q">“None.”</span> Then again the king asked, <span class="tei tei-q">“Do you both agree in this, without any controversy,
			that these words were said above all to Peter, and that the keys of
			the kingdom of Heaven were given to him by our Lord?”</span> They
			both answered, <span class="tei tei-q">“Yes.”</span> Then the king
			concluded, <span class="tei tei-q">“And I also say unto you, that
			he is the door-keeper, and I will not gainsay him, but I desire, as
			far as I know and am able, in all things to obey his laws, lest
			haply when I come to the gates of the kingdom of Heaven, there
			should be <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page201">[pg
			201]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg201"/>
			none to open them, he being my adversary who is proved to have the
			keys.”</span> The king having said this, all who were seated there
			or standing by, both great and small, gave their assent, and
			renouncing the less perfect custom, hastened to conform to that
			which they had found to be better.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
			<a id="toc175"/> <a id="pdf176"/>
			<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Book_III_Chap_XXVI"/>
			-->
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
