<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>X</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-4" id="chapter-4-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">X</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">How a blind woman, praying in the burial-place of that monastery, was restored to her sight. [675 a.d.?]</p>
			</header>
			<p>Hildilid, a
			devout handmaid of God, succeeded Ethelburg in the office of abbess
			and presided over that monastery with great vigour many years, till
			she was of an extreme old age,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-585" id="noteref-585" epub:type="noteref">585</a> in
			the observance of regular discipline, and carefully providing all
			things for the common use. The narrowness of the space where the
			monastery is built, led her to determine that the bones of the
			servants and handmaidens of Christ, who had been there buried,
			should be taken up, and should all be translated into the church of
			the Blessed Mother of God, and interred in one place. How often a
			brightness of heavenly light was seen there, when this was done,
			and a fragrancy of wonderful sweetness arose, and what other signs
			were revealed, whosoever reads will find in the book from which we
			have taken these tales.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-586" id="noteref-586" epub:type="noteref">586</a></p>
			<p>But in truth, I
			think it by no means fit to pass over <!--Page 238-->the miracle of healing, which the same book
			informs us was wrought in the cemetery of that community dedicated
			to God. There lived in that neighbourhood a certain thegn, whose
			wife was seized with a sudden dimness in her eyes, and as the
			malady increased daily, it became so burdensome to her, that she
			could not see the least glimpse of light. Having continued some
			time wrapped in the night of this blindness, on a sudden she
			bethought herself that she might recover her lost sight, if she
			were carried to the monastery of the nuns, and there prayed at the
			relics of the saints. Nor did she lose any time in fulfilling that
			which she had conceived in her mind: for being conducted by her
			maids to the monastery, which was very near, and professing that
			she had perfect faith that she should be there healed, she was led
			into the cemetery, and having long prayed there on her knees, she
			did not fail to be heard, for as she rose from prayer, before she
			went out of the place, she received the gift of sight which she had
			desired; and whereas she had been led thither by the hands of her
			maids, she now returned home joyfully without help: as if she had
			lost the light of this world to no other end than that she might
			show by her recovery how great a light is vouchsafed to the saints
			of Christ in Heaven, and how great a grace of healing power.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
