<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-4" id="chapter-4-16" epub:type="chapter">
			<!--Page 252-->
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">How the Isle of Wight received Christian inhabitants, and two royal youths of that island were killed immediately after Baptism. [686 a.d.]</p>
			</header>
			<p>After Caedwalla
			had obtained possession of the kingdom of the Gewissae, he took
			also the Isle of Wight, which till then was entirely given over to
			idolatry, and by merciless slaughter endeavoured to destroy all the
			inhabitants thereof, and to place in their stead people from his
			own province; binding himself by a vow, though it is said that he
			was not yet regenerated in Christ, to give the fourth part of the
			land and of the spoil to the Lord, if he took the island. He
			fulfilled this vow by giving the same for the service of the Lord
			to Bishop Wilfrid, who happened at the time to have come thither
			from his own people.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-636" id="noteref-636" epub:type="noteref">636</a> The
			measure of that island, according to the computation of the
			English, is of twelve hundred families, wherefore an estate of
			three hundred families was given to the Bishop. The part which he
			received, he committed to one of his clerks called Bernwin, who was
			his sister's son, assigning to him a priest, whose name was
			Hiddila, to administer the Word and laver of life to all that would
			be saved.</p>
			<p>Here I think it
			ought not to be omitted that, as the first fruits of those of that
			island who believed and were saved, two royal boys, brothers to
			Arwald, king of the island,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-637" id="noteref-637" epub:type="noteref">637</a> were
			crowned with the special grace of God. For when the enemy
			approached, they made their escape out of the island, and crossed
			over into the neighbouring province of the Jutes.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-638" id="noteref-638" epub:type="noteref">638</a>
			Coming to the place called At the Stone,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-639" id="noteref-639" epub:type="noteref">639</a> they
			thought to be concealed from the victorious king, but they were
			betrayed and ordered to be killed. This <!--Page 253-->being made known to a certain abbot and
			priest, whose name was Cynibert, who had a monastery not far from
			there, at a place called Hreutford,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-640" id="noteref-640" epub:type="noteref">640</a> that
			is, the Ford of Reeds, he came to the king, who then lay in
			concealment in those parts to be cured of the wounds which he had
			received whilst he was fighting in the Isle of Wight, and begged of
			him, that if the boys must needs be killed, he might be allowed
			first to instruct them in the mysteries of the Christian faith. The
			king consented, and the bishop having taught them the Word of
			truth, and cleansed them in the font of salvation, assured to them
			their entrance into the kingdom of Heaven. Then the executioner
			came, and they joyfully underwent the temporal death, through which
			they did not doubt they were to pass to the life of the soul, which
			is everlasting. Thus, after this manner, when all the provinces of
			Britain had received the faith of Christ, the Isle of Wight also
			received the same; yet because it was suffering under the
			affliction of foreign subjection, no man there received the office
			or see of a bishop, before Daniel, who is now bishop of the West
			Saxons.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-641" id="noteref-641" epub:type="noteref">641</a></p>
			<p>The island is
			situated opposite the borders of the South Saxons and the Gewissae,
			being separated from it by a sea, three miles wide, which is called
			Solvente.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-642" id="noteref-642" epub:type="noteref">642</a> In
			this sea, the two tides of the ocean, which break upon Britain all
			round its coasts from the boundless northern ocean, daily meet in
			conflict beyond the mouth of the river Homelea,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-643" id="noteref-643" epub:type="noteref">643</a> which
			runs into the aforesaid sea, through the lands of the Jutes,
			belonging to the country of the Gewissae; and after this struggle
			of the tides, they fall back and return into the ocean whence they
			come.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
