<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-4" id="chapter-4-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">How Wynfrid being deposed, Sexwulf received his bishopric, and Earconwald was made bishop of the East Saxons. [675 a.d.]</p>
			</header>
			<p>Not long after
			these events, Theodore, the archbishop, taking offence at some act
			of disobedience of Wynfrid, bishop of the Mercians,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-574" id="noteref-574" epub:type="noteref">574</a>
			deposed him from his bishopric when he had held it but a few years,
			and in his place ordained Sexwulf bishop,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-575" id="noteref-575" epub:type="noteref">575</a> who
			was founder and abbot of the monastery which is called
			Medeshamstead,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-576" id="noteref-576" epub:type="noteref">576</a> in
			the country of the Gyrwas.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-577" id="noteref-577" epub:type="noteref">577</a>
			Wynfrid, thus deposed, returned to his monastery which is called Ad
			Barvae,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-578" id="noteref-578" epub:type="noteref">578</a> and
			there ended his life in holy conversation.</p>
			<p>Theodore then
			also appointed Earconwald,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-579" id="noteref-579" epub:type="noteref">579</a>
			bishop of <!--Page 232-->
			the East Saxons, in the city of London, over whom at that time
			reigned Sebbi and Sighere, of whom mention has been made
			above.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-580" id="noteref-580" epub:type="noteref">580</a> This
			Earconwald's life and conversation, as well when he was bishop as
			before that time, is said to have been most holy, as is even now
			testified by heavenly miracles; for to this day, his horse-litter,
			in which he was wont to be carried when sick, is kept by his
			disciples, and continues to cure many of fevers and other ailments;
			and not only sick persons who are laid under that litter, or close
			by it, are cured; but the very splinters cut from it, when carried
			to the sick, are wont immediately to bring healing to them.</p>
			<p>This man, before
			he was made bishop, had built two famous monasteries, the one for
			himself, and the other for his sister Ethelburg,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-581" id="noteref-581" epub:type="noteref">581</a> and
			established them both in regular discipline of the best kind. That
			for himself was in the district of Sudergeona, by the river Thames,
			at a place called Cerotaesei,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-582" id="noteref-582" epub:type="noteref">582</a> that
			is, the Island of Cerot; that for his sister in the province of the
			East Saxons, at a place called In Berecingum,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-583" id="noteref-583" epub:type="noteref">583</a>
			wherein she might be a mother and nurse of women devoted to God.
			Being put into the government of that monastery, she showed herself
			in all respects worthy of her brother the bishop, by her own holy
			life and by her regular and pious care of those under her rule, as
			was also manifested by heavenly miracles.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
