<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-5" id="chapter-5-20" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XX</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">How Albinus succeeded to the godly Abbot Hadrian, and Acca to Bishop Wilfrid. [709 a.d.]</p>
			</header>
			<p>The next year after the death of the aforesaid father,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-937" id="noteref-937" epub:type="noteref">937</a> which was the fifth year of King Osred, the most reverend father, Abbot Hadrian,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-938" id="noteref-938" epub:type="noteref">938</a> fellow labourer in the Word of God with Bishop Theodore<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-939" id="noteref-939" epub:type="noteref">939</a> of blessed memory, died, and was buried in the church of the Blessed Mother of God, in his own monastery,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-940" id="noteref-940" epub:type="noteref">940</a> this being the forty-first year after he was sent by Pope Vitalian with Theodore, and the thirty-ninth after his arrival in England. Among other proofs of his learning, as well as Theodore's, there is this testimony, that Albinus,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-941" id="noteref-941" epub:type="noteref">941</a> his disciple, who succeeded him in the government of his monastery, was so well instructed in literary studies, that he had no small knowledge of the Greek tongue, and knew the Latin as well as the English, which was his native language.</p>
			<p>Acca,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-942" id="noteref-942" epub:type="noteref">942</a> his priest, succeeded Wilfrid in the bishopric of <!--Page 358-->the church of Hagustald, being likewise a man of zeal and great in noble works in the sight of God and man. He enriched the structure of his church, which is dedicated in honour of the blessed Apostle Andrew with manifold adornments and marvellous workmanship. For he gave all diligence, as he does to this day, to procure relics of the blessed Apostles and martyrs of Christ from all parts, and to raise altars in their honour in separate side-chapels built for the purpose within the walls of the same church. Besides which, he industriously gathered the histories of their martyrdom, together with other ecclesiastical writings, and erected there a large and noble library. He likewise carefully provided holy vessels, lamps, and other such things as appertain to the adorning of the house of God. He in like manner invited to him a notable singer called Maban,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-943" id="noteref-943" epub:type="noteref">943</a> who had been taught to sing by the successors of the disciples of the blessed Pope Gregory in Kent, to instruct himself and his clergy, and kept him twelve years, to the end that he might teach such Church music as they did not know, and by his teaching restore to its former state that which was corrupted either by long use, or through neglect. For Bishop Acca himself was a most skilful singer, as well as most learned in Holy Writ, sound in the confession of the catholic faith, and well versed in the rules of ecclesiastical custom; nor does he cease to walk after this manner, till he receive the rewards of his pious devotion. For he was brought up from boyhood and instructed among the clergy of the most holy and beloved of God, Bosa, bishop of York.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-944" id="noteref-944" epub:type="noteref">944</a> Afterwards, coming to Bishop Wilfrid in the hope of a better plan of life, he spent the rest of his days in attendance on him till that bishop's death, and going with him to Rome, learned there many profitable things concerning the ordinances of the Holy Church, which he could not have learned in his own country.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
