<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2" id="chapter-2-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">How Bishop Mellitus by prayer quenched a fire in his city. [619 a.d.]</p>
			</header>
			<p>In this king's
			reign, the blessed Archbishop Laurentius was taken up to the
			heavenly kingdom: he was buried in the church and monastery of the
			holy Apostle Peter, close by his predecessor Augustine, on the 2nd
			day of the month of February.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-198" id="noteref-198" epub:type="noteref">198</a>
			Mellitus, who was bishop of London, succeeded to the see of
			Canterbury, being the third archbishop from Augustine; Justus, who
			was still living, governed the church of Rochester. These ruled the
			Church of the English with much care and industry, and received
			letters of exhortation from Boniface,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-199" id="noteref-199" epub:type="noteref">199</a>
			bishop of the Roman Apostolic see, who presided over the Church
			after Deusdedit, in the year of our Lord 619. Mellitus laboured
			under the bodily infirmity of gout, but his mind was sound and
			active, cheerfully passing over all earthly things, and always
			aspiring to love, seek, and attain to <!--Page 099-->those which are celestial. He was noble by
			birth, but still nobler by the elevation of his mind.</p>
			<p>In short, that I
			may give one instance of his power, from which the rest may be
			inferred, it happened once that the city of Canterbury, being set
			on fire through carelessness, was in danger of being consumed by
			the spreading conflagration; water was thrown on the fire in vain;
			a considerable part of the city was already destroyed, and the
			fierce flames were advancing towards the bishop's abode, when he,
			trusting in God, where human help failed, ordered himself to be
			carried towards the raging masses of fire which were spreading on
			every side. The church of the four crowned Martyrs<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-200" id="noteref-200" epub:type="noteref">200</a> was
			in the place where the fire raged most fiercely. The bishop, being
			carried thither by his servants, weak as he was, set about averting
			by prayer the danger which the strong hands of active men had not
			been able to overcome with all their exertions. Immediately the
			wind, which blowing from the south had spread the conflagration
			throughout the city, veered to the north, and thus prevented the
			destruction of those places that had been exposed to its full
			violence, then it ceased entirely and there was a calm, while the
			flames likewise sank and were extinguished. And because the man of
			God burned with the fire of divine love, and was wont to drive away
			the storms of the powers of the air, by his frequent prayers and at
			his bidding, from doing harm to himself, or his people, it was meet
			that he should be allowed to prevail over the winds and flames of
			this world, and to obtain that they should not injure him or
			his.</p>
			<p>This archbishop
			also, having ruled the church five years, departed to heaven in the
			reign of King Eadbald, and was buried with his fathers in the
			monastery and church, which we have so often mentioned, of the most
			<!--Page 100-->blessed chief of the
			Apostles, in the year of our Lord 624, on the 24th day of
			April.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
