<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2" id="chapter-2-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">How Augustine admonished the bishops of the Britons on behalf of Catholic peace, and to that end wrought a heavenly miracle in their presence; and of the vengeance that pursued them for their contempt. [Circ. 603 a.d.]</p>
			</header>
			<p>In the meantime,
			Augustine, with the help of King Ethelbert, drew together to a
			conference the bishops and doctors of the nearest province of the
			Britons, at a place <!--Page 084-->
			which is to this day called, in the English language, Augustine's
			Ác, that is, Augustine's Oak,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-162" id="noteref-162" epub:type="noteref">162</a> on
			the borders of the Hwiccas<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-163" id="noteref-163" epub:type="noteref">163</a> and
			West Saxons; and began by brotherly admonitions to persuade them to
			preserve Catholic peace with him, and undertake the common labour
			of preaching the Gospel to the heathen for the Lord's sake. For
			they did not keep Easter Sunday at the proper time, but from the
			fourteenth to the twentieth moon; which computation is contained in
			a cycle of eighty-four years.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-164" id="noteref-164" epub:type="noteref">164</a>
			Besides, they did many other things <!--Page 085-->which were opposed to the unity of the
			church.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-165" id="noteref-165" epub:type="noteref">165</a> When,
			after a long disputation, they did not comply with the entreaties,
			exhortations, or rebukes of Augustine and his companions, but
			preferred their own traditions before all the Churches which are
			united in Christ throughout the world, the holy father, Augustine,
			put an end to this troublesome and tedious contention, saying,
			<span class="tei tei-q">“Let us entreat God, who maketh men to be
			of one mind in His Father's house, to vouchsafe, by signs from
			Heaven, to declare to us which tradition is to be followed; and by
			what path we are to strive to enter His kingdom. Let some sick man
			be brought, and let the faith and practice of him, by whose prayers
			he shall be healed, be looked upon as hallowed in God's sight and
			such as should be adopted by all.”</span> His adversaries
			unwillingly consenting, a blind man of the English race was
			brought, who having been presented to the British bishops, found no
			benefit or healing from their ministry; at length, Augustine,
			compelled by strict necessity, bowed his knees to the Father of our
			Lord Jesus Christ, praying that He would restore his lost sight to
			the blind man, and by the bodily enlightenment of one kindle the
			grace of spiritual light in the hearts of many of the faithful.
			Immediately the blind man received sight, and Augustine was
			proclaimed by all to be a true herald of the light from Heaven. The
			Britons then confessed that they perceived that it was the
			<!--Page 086-->true way of
			righteousness which Augustine taught; but that they could not
			depart from their ancient customs without the consent and sanction
			of their people. They therefore desired that a second time a synod
			might be appointed, at which more of their number should be
			present.</p>
			<p>This being
			decreed, there came, it is said, seven bishops of the
			Britons,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-166" id="noteref-166" epub:type="noteref">166</a> and
			many men of great learning, particularly from their most celebrated
			monastery, which is called, in the English tongue,
			Bancornaburg,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-167" id="noteref-167" epub:type="noteref">167</a> and
			over which the Abbot Dinoot<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-168" id="noteref-168" epub:type="noteref">168</a> is
			said to have presided at that time. They that were to go to the
			aforesaid council, betook themselves first to a certain holy and
			discreet man, who was wont to lead the life of a hermit among them,
			to consult with him, whether they ought, at the preaching of
			Augustine, to forsake their traditions. He answered, <span class="tei tei-q">“If he is a man of God, follow
			him.”</span>—<span class="tei tei-q">“How shall we know
			that?”</span> said they. He replied, <span class="tei tei-q">“Our
			Lord saith, Take My yoke upon you, and learn of Me, for I am meek
			and lowly in heart; if therefore, Augustine is meek and lowly of
			heart, it is to be believed that he bears the yoke of Christ
			himself, and offers it to you to bear. But, if he is harsh and
			proud, it is plain that he is not of God, nor are we to regard his
			words.”</span> They said again, <span class="tei tei-q">“And how
			shall we discern even this?”</span>—<span class="tei tei-q">“Do you
			contrive,”</span> said the anchorite, <span class="tei tei-q">“that
			he first arrive with his company at the place where the synod is to
			be held; and if at your approach he rises up to you, hear him
			submissively, being assured that he is the servant of Christ; but
			if he despises you, and does not rise up to you, whereas you are
			more in number, let him also be despised by
			you.”</span></p><!--Page 087-->
			<p>They did as he
			directed; and it happened, that as they approached, Augustine was
			sitting on a chair. When they perceived it, they were angry, and
			charging him with pride, set themselves to contradict all he said.
			He said to them, <span class="tei tei-q">“Many things ye do which
			are contrary to our custom, or rather the custom of the universal
			Church, and yet, if you will comply with me in these three matters,
			to wit, to keep Easter at the due time; to fulfil the ministry of
			Baptism, by which we are born again to God, according to the custom
			of the holy Roman Apostolic Church;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-169" id="noteref-169" epub:type="noteref">169</a> and
			to join with us in preaching the Word of God to the English nation,
			we will gladly suffer all the other things you do, though contrary
			to our customs.”</span> They answered that they would do none of
			those things, nor receive him as their archbishop; for they said
			among themselves, <span class="tei tei-q">“if he would not rise up
			to us now, how much more will he despise us, as of no account, if
			we begin to be under his subjection?”</span> Then the man of God,
			Augustine, is said to have threatened them, that if they would not
			accept peace with their brethren, they should have war from their
			enemies; and, if they would not preach the way of life to the
			English nation, they should suffer at their hands the vengeance of
			death. All which, through the dispensation of the Divine judgement,
			fell out exactly as he had predicted.</p>
			<p>For afterwards
			the warlike king of the English, Ethelfrid,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-170" id="noteref-170" epub:type="noteref">170</a> of
			whom we have spoken, having raised a mighty army, made a very great
			slaughter of that heretical nation, at the city of Legions,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-171" id="noteref-171" epub:type="noteref">171</a> which
			by the English is <!--Page 088-->
			called Legacaestir, but by the Britons more rightly Carlegion.
			Being about to give battle, he observed their priests, who were
			come together to offer up their prayers to God for the combatants,
			standing apart in a place of greater safety; he inquired who they
			were, and what they came together to do in that place. Most of them
			were of the monastery of Bangor,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-172" id="noteref-172" epub:type="noteref">172</a> in
			which, it is said, there was so great a number of monks, that the
			monastery being divided into seven parts, with a superior set over
			each, none of those parts contained less than three hundred men,
			who all lived by the labour of their hands. Many of these, having
			observed a fast of three days, had come together along with others
			to pray at the aforesaid battle, having one Brocmail<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-173" id="noteref-173" epub:type="noteref">173</a> for
			their protector, to defend them, whilst they were intent upon their
			prayers, against the swords of the barbarians. King Ethelfrid being
			informed of the occasion of their coming, said, <span class="tei tei-q">“If then they cry to their God against us, in truth,
			though they do not bear arms, yet they fight against us, because
			they assail us with their curses.”</span> He, therefore, commanded
			them to be attacked first, and then destroyed the rest of the
			impious army, not without great loss of his own forces. About
			twelve hundred of those that came to pray are said to have been
			killed, and only fifty to have escaped by flight. Brocmail, turning
			his back with his men, at the first approach of the enemy, left
			those whom he ought to have defended unarmed and exposed to the
			swords of the assailants. Thus was fulfilled the prophecy of the
			holy Bishop Augustine, though he himself had been long before taken
			up into the heavenly kingdom, that the heretics should feel the
			vengeance of temporal death also, because they had despised the
			offer of eternal salvation.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
