<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-1" id="chapter-1-21" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">How, when the Pelagian heresy began to spring up afresh, Germanus, returning to Britain with Severus, first restored bodily strength to a lame youth, then spiritual health to the people of God, having condemned or converted the Heretics. [447 a.d.]</p>
			</header>
			<p>Not long after,
			news was brought from the same island, that certain persons were
			again attempting to teach and spread abroad the Pelagian heresy,
			and again the holy Germanus was entreated by all the priests, that
			he would defend the cause of God, which he had before maintained.
			He speedily complied with their request; and taking <!--Page 040-->with him Severus,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-99" id="noteref-99" epub:type="noteref">99</a> a man
			of singular sanctity, who was disciple to the blessed father,
			Lupus, bishop of Troyes, and at that time, having been ordained
			bishop of the Treveri, was preaching the Word of God to the tribes
			of Upper Germany, put to sea, and with favouring winds and calm
			waters sailed to Britain.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-100" id="noteref-100" epub:type="noteref">100</a></p>
			<p>In the meantime,
			the evil spirits, speeding through the whole island, were
			constrained against their will to foretell that Germanus was
			coming, insomuch, that one Elafius, a chief of that region, without
			tidings from any visible messenger, hastened to meet the holy men,
			carrying with him his son, who in the very flower of his youth
			laboured under a grievous infirmity; for the sinews of the knee
			were wasted and shrunk, so that the withered limb was denied the
			power to walk. All the country followed this Elafius. The bishops
			arrived, and were met by the ignorant multitude, whom they blessed,
			and preached the Word of God to them. They found the people
			constant in the faith as they had left them; and learning that but
			few had gone astray, they sought out the authors of the evil and
			condemned them. Then suddenly Elafius cast himself at the feet of
			the bishops, presenting his son, whose distress was visible and
			needed no words to express it. All were grieved, but especially the
			bishops, who, filled with pity, invoked the mercy of God; and
			straightway the blessed Germanus, causing the youth to sit down,
			touched the bent and feeble knee and passed his healing hand over
			all the diseased part. At once health was restored by the power of
			his touch, the withered limb regained its vigour, the sinews
			resumed their task, and the youth was, in the presence of all the
			people, delivered whole to his father. The multitude was amazed at
			the miracle, and the Catholic faith was firmly established in the
			hearts of all; after which, they were, in a sermon, exhorted to
			amend their error. By the judgement of all, the exponents of the
			heresy, who had been <!--Page 041-->
			banished from the island, were brought before the bishops, to be
			conveyed into the continent, that the country might be rid of them,
			and they corrected of their errors. So it came to pass that the
			faith in those parts continued long after pure and untainted. Thus
			when they had settled all things, the blessed prelates returned
			home as prosperously as they had come.</p>
			<p>But Germanus,
			after this, went to Ravenna to intercede for the tranquillity of
			the Armoricans,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-101" id="noteref-101" epub:type="noteref">101</a>
			where, after being very honourably received by Valentinian and his
			mother, Placidia, he departed hence to Christ; his body was
			conveyed to his own city with a splendid retinue, and mighty works
			attended his passage to the grave. Not long after, Valentinian was
			murdered by the followers of Aetius, the patrician, whom he had put
			to death, in the sixth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-102" id="noteref-102" epub:type="noteref">102</a> year
			of the reign of Marcian, and with him ended the empire of the
			West.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
