<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-3" id="chapter-3-28" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">How, when Tuda was dead, Wilfrid was ordained, in Gaul, and Ceadda, among the West Saxons, to be bishops for the province of the Northumbrians. [664 a.d.]</p>
			</header>
			<p>In the meantime,
			King Alchfrid sent the priest, Wilfrid, to the king of Gaul,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-492" id="noteref-492" epub:type="noteref">492</a> in
			order that he should cause him to be consecrated bishop for himself
			and his people. That prince sent him to be ordained by
			Agilbert,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-493" id="noteref-493" epub:type="noteref">493</a> of
			whom we have before spoken, and who, having left Britain, was made
			bishop of the city of Paris;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-494" id="noteref-494" epub:type="noteref">494</a> and
			by him Wilfrid was honourably consecrated, several bishops meeting
			together for that purpose in a village belonging to the king,
			called In Compendio.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-495" id="noteref-495" epub:type="noteref">495</a> He
			stayed some <!--Page 207-->
			time in the parts beyond the sea for his ordination, and King Oswy,
			following the example of his son's zeal, sent into Kent a holy man,
			of modest character, well read in the Scripture, and diligently
			practising those things which he had learned therein, to be
			ordained bishop of the church of York. This was a priest called
			Ceadda,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-496" id="noteref-496" epub:type="noteref">496</a>
			brother to the most reverend prelate Cedd, of whom mention has been
			often made, and abbot of the monastery of Laestingaeu. With him the
			king also sent his priest Eadhaed,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-497" id="noteref-497" epub:type="noteref">497</a> who
			was afterwards, in the reign of Egfrid,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-498" id="noteref-498" epub:type="noteref">498</a> made
			bishop of the church of Ripon. Now when they arrived in Kent, they
			found that Archbishop Deusdedit had departed this life, and no
			other bishop was as yet appointed in his place; whereupon they
			betook themselves to the province of the West Saxons, where Wini
			was bishop, and by him Ceadda was consecrated; two bishops of the
			British nation, who kept Easter Sunday, as has been often said,
			contrary to the canonical manner, from the fourteenth to the
			twentieth moon, being called in to assist at the ordination; for at
			that time there was no other bishop in all Britain canonically
			ordained, except Wini.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-499" id="noteref-499" epub:type="noteref">499</a></p>
			<p>So Ceadda, being
			consecrated bishop, began immediately to labour for ecclesiastical
			truth and purity of <!--Page 208-->
			doctrine; to apply himself to humility, self-denial, and study; to
			travel about, not on horseback, but after the manner of the
			Apostles, on foot, to preach the Gospel in towns, the open country,
			cottages, villages, and castles; for he was one of the disciples of
			Aidan, and endeavoured to instruct his people by the same manner of
			life and character, after his and his own brother Cedd's example.
			Wilfrid also having been now made a bishop, came into Britain, and
			in like manner by his teaching brought into the English Church many
			rules of Catholic observance. Whence it followed, that the Catholic
			principles daily gained strength, and all the Scots that dwelt in
			England either conformed to these, or returned into their own
			country.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
