<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Continuation</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="continuation" epub:type="chapter">
			<!--Page 390-->
			<h2 epub:type="title">Continuation</h2>
			<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Continuation of
			Bede.</span></span><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1056" id="noteref-1056" epub:type="noteref">1056</a></p>
			<p>In the year 731
			King Ceolwulf was taken prisoner, and tonsured, and sent back to his
			kingdom; Bishop Acca was driven from his see.</p>
			<p>In the year 732,
			Egbert<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1057" id="noteref-1057" epub:type="noteref">1057</a> was
			made Bishop of York, in the room of Wilfrid.</p>
			<p>[Cynibert Bishop
			of Lindsey died.]</p>
			<p>[In the year of
			our Lord 733, Archbishop Tatwine, having received the pall by
			Apostolic authority, ordained Alwic<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1058" id="noteref-1058" epub:type="noteref">1058</a> and
			Sigfrid,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1059" id="noteref-1059" epub:type="noteref">1059</a>
			bishops.]</p>
			<p>In the year 733,
			there was an eclipse of the sun on the 14th day of August about the
			third hour, in such wise that the whole orb of the sun seemed to be
			covered with a black and gloomy shield.</p>
			<p>In the year 734,
			the moon, on the 31st of January, about the time of cock-crowing,
			was, for about a whole hour, coloured blood-red, after which a
			blackness followed, and she regained her wonted light.</p>
			<p>In the year from
			the Incarnation of Christ, 734, bishop Tatwine died.</p>
			<p>In the year 735,
			Nothelm was ordained archbishop; and bishop Egbert, having received
			the pall from the Apostolic see, was the first to be established as
			<!--Page 391-->archbishop<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1060" id="noteref-1060" epub:type="noteref">1060</a> after
			Paulinus, and he ordained Frithbert,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1061" id="noteref-1061" epub:type="noteref">1061</a> and
			Frithwald<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1062" id="noteref-1062" epub:type="noteref">1062</a>
			bishops; and the priest Bede died.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1063" id="noteref-1063" epub:type="noteref">1063</a></p>
			<p>In the year 737,
			an excessive drought rendered the land unfruitful; and Ceolwulf,
			voluntarily receiving the tonsure, left the kingdom to Eadbert.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1064" id="noteref-1064" epub:type="noteref">1064</a></p>
			<p>In the year 739,
			Edilhart,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1065" id="noteref-1065" epub:type="noteref">1065</a> king
			of the West-Saxons, died, as did Archbishop Nothelm.</p>
			<p>In the year 740,
			Cuthbert<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1066" id="noteref-1066" epub:type="noteref">1066</a> was
			consecrated in Nothelm's stead. Ethelbald, king of the Mercians,
			cruelly and wrongfully wasted part of Northumbria, their king,
			Eadbert, with his army, being employed against the Picts. Bishop
			Ethelwald died also, and Conwulf,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1067" id="noteref-1067" epub:type="noteref">1067</a> was
			consecrated in his stead. Arnwin<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1068" id="noteref-1068" epub:type="noteref">1068</a> and
			Eadbert<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1069" id="noteref-1069" epub:type="noteref">1069</a> were
			slain.</p>
			<p>In the year 741, a
			great drought came upon the country. Charles,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1070" id="noteref-1070" epub:type="noteref">1070</a> king
			of the Franks, died; and his sons, Caroloman and Pippin,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1071" id="noteref-1071" epub:type="noteref">1071</a>
			reigned in his stead.</p>
			<p>In the year 745,
			Bishop Wilfrid and Ingwald, Bishop of London, departed to the
			Lord.</p>
			<p>In the year 747,
			the man of God, Herefrid,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1072" id="noteref-1072" epub:type="noteref">1072</a>
			died.</p>
			<p>In the year 750,
			Cuthred, king of the West Saxons, rose up against king Ethelbald and
			Oengus; Theudor <!--Page 392--> and
			Eanred died; Eadbert added the plain of Kyle and other places to his
			dominions.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1073" id="noteref-1073" epub:type="noteref">1073</a></p>
			<p>In the year 753,
			in the fifth year of King Eadbert, on the 9th of January,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1074" id="noteref-1074" epub:type="noteref">1074</a> an
			eclipse of the sun came to pass; afterwards, in the same year and
			month, on the 24th day of January, the moon suffered an eclipse,
			being covered with a gloomy, black shield, in like manner as was the
			sun a little while before.</p>
			<p>In the year 754,
			Boniface,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1075" id="noteref-1075" epub:type="noteref">1075</a> called
			also Winfrid, Bishop of the Franks, received the crown of martyrdom,
			together with fifty-three others; and Redger was consecrated
			archbishop in his stead, by pope Stephen.</p>
			<p>In the year 757,
			Ethelbald, king of the Mercians, was treacherously and miserably
			murdered, in the night, by his own guards; Beornred<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1076" id="noteref-1076" epub:type="noteref">1076</a> began
			his reign; Cyniwulf,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1077" id="noteref-1077" epub:type="noteref">1077</a> king
			of the West Saxons, died; and the same year, Offa, having put
			Beornred to flight, sought to gain the kingdom of the Mercians by
			bloodshed.</p>
			<p>In the year 758,
			Eadbert, king of the Northumbrians, <!--Page 393-->receiving St. Peter's tonsure for the love of
			God, and to the end that he might take the heavenly country by
			force,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1078" id="noteref-1078" epub:type="noteref">1078</a> left
			the kingdom to his son Oswulf.</p>
			<p>In the year 755,
			Oswulf was wickedly murdered by his own thegns; and Ethelwald, being
			chosen the same year by his people, entered upon the kingdom; in
			whose second year there was great tribulation by reason of
			pestilence, which continued almost two years, divers grievous
			sicknesses raging, but more especially the disease of dysentery.</p>
			<p>In the year 761,
			Oengus,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1079" id="noteref-1079" epub:type="noteref">1079</a> king
			of the Picts, died; who, from the beginning to the end of his reign,
			continued to be a blood-stained and tyrannical butcher; Oswin<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1080" id="noteref-1080" epub:type="noteref">1080</a> was
			also slain.</p>
			<p>In the year 765,
			King Aluchred came to the throne.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1081" id="noteref-1081" epub:type="noteref">1081</a></p>
			<p>In the year 766
			<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>, Archbishop Egbert, of
			the royal race, and endued with divine knowledge, as also Frithbert,
			both of them truly faithful bishops, departed to the Lord.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
