<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Life of Bede</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="life-of-bede" epub:type="foreword">
			<!--Page xxxiii-->
			<h2 epub:type="title">Life of Bede</h2>
			<p>Few lives afford
			less material for the biographer than Bede's; few seem to possess a
			more irresistible fascination. Often as the simple story has been
			told, the desire to tell it afresh appears to be perennial. And yet
			it is perhaps as wholly devoid of incident as any life could be. The
			short autobiographical sketch at the end of the <span class="tei tei-q">“Ecclesiastical History”</span> tells us practically all:
			that he was born in the territory of the twin monastery of Wearmouth
			and Jarrow; that at the age of seven he was sent by his kinsfolk to
			be brought up, first under the Abbot Benedict, afterwards under
			Ceolfrid; that in his nineteenth year (the canonical age was
			twenty-five) he was admitted to the diaconate, and received priest's
			orders in his thirtieth year, in both instances at the hands of John,
			Bishop of Hexham, and by order of the Abbot Ceolfrid; that he spent
			his whole life in the monastery in learning, in teaching, and in
			writing, and in the observance of the monastic rule and attendance at
			the daily services of the Church. Of his family we know nothing; the
			name Beda appears to have been not uncommon. The fact that he was
			handed over by kinsmen (<span class="tei tei-q">“cura
			propinquorum”</span>) to Abbot Benedict would seem to imply that he
			was an orphan when he entered the monastery at the age of seven, but
			it was not unusual for parents to dedicate their infant children to
			the religious life, in many cases even at an earlier age than Bede's.
			We may compare the story of the little boy, Aesica, at Barking,
			related by Bede, and of Elfled, the daughter of Oswy, dedicated by
			her father before she was a year old.</p><!--Page xxxiv-->
			<p>The epithet
			<span class="tei tei-q">“Venerable,”</span> commonly attached to his
			name, has given rise to more than one legend. It was apparently first
			applied to him in the ninth century, and is said to have been an
			appellation of priests. The best known of these legends is Fuller's
			story of a certain <span class="tei tei-q">“dunce monk”</span> who
			set about writing Bede's epitaph, and being unable to complete the
			verse, <span class="tei tei-q">“Hic sunt in fossa Bedae ...
			ossa,”</span> went to bed with his task unfinished. Returning to it
			in the morning, he found that an angel had filled the gap with the
			word <span class="tei tei-q">“venerabilis.”</span> Another account
			tells how Bede, in his old age, when his eyes were dim, was induced
			by certain <span class="tei tei-q">“mockers”</span> to preach, under
			the mistaken belief that the people were assembled to hear him. As he
			ended his sermon with a solemn invocation of the Trinity, the angels
			(in one version it is the stones of a rocky valley) responded
			<span class="tei tei-q">“Amen, very venerable Bede.”</span></p>
			<p>The land on which
			Bede was born was granted by Egfrid to Benedict Biscop for the
			foundation of the monasteries a short time after the birth of Bede.
			Wearmouth was founded in 674, Jarrow in 681 or 682. Bede was among
			those members of the community who were transferred to Jarrow under
			Abbot Ceolfrid, and under his rule and that of his successor,
			Huaetbert, he passed his life. With regard to the chief dates, the
			authorities differ, Simeon of Durham and others placing his birth as
			late as 677. Bede himself tells us that he was in his fifty-ninth
			year when he wrote the short autobiography at the end of the History.
			That work was finished in 731, and there seems to be no good reason
			to suppose that the autobiographical sketch was written at a later
			time. We may infer then that he was born in 673, that he was ordained
			deacon in 691 and priest in 702. For his death, 735, the date given
			in the <a class="tei tei-ref pginternal" href="#Continuation"><span class="tei tei-q">“Continuation,”</span></a> seems to be supported by the
			evidence of the letter of Cuthbert to Cuthwin (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">v.
			infra</span></span>). From this it appears that he died on a
			Wednesday, which nevertheless is called Ascension Day, implying,
			doubtless, that his death occurred on the eve, after the festival had
			begun, according to ecclesiastical reckoning. It is further explained
			<!--Page xxxv-->that Ascension Day
			was on the 26th of May (<span class="tei tei-q">“VII Kal.
			Junii”</span>),<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> which was
			actually the case in the year 735.</p>
			<p>Beyond the
			testimony borne to his exceptional diligence as a student in a letter
			from Alcuin to the monks of Wearmouth and Jarrow, we hear nothing of
			his childhood and early youth. One anecdote in the Anonymous History
			of the Abbots may perhaps refer to him, though no name is given. It
			tells how, when the plague of 686 devastated the monastery, the Abbot
			Ceolfrid, for lack of fit persons to assist at the daily offices,
			decided to recite the psalms without antiphons, except at vespers and
			matins. But after a week's trial, unable to bear it any longer, he
			restored the antiphons to their proper place, and with the help of
			one little boy carried on the services in the usual manner. This
			little boy is described as being, at the time the History was
			written, a priest of that monastery who <span class="tei tei-q">“duly, both by his words and writings, commends the
			Abbot's praiseworthy deeds to all who seek to know them,”</span> and
			he has generally been supposed to be Bede.</p>
			<p>In the
			<span class="tei tei-q">“Ecclesiastical History”</span> (IV, 3) there
			is an allusion to Bede's teachers, one of whom, Trumbert, educated at
			Lastingham under Ceadda, is mentioned by name. The monastery of
			Wearmouth and Jarrow must have offered exceptional facilities for
			study. Benedict had enriched it with many treasures which he brought
			with him from his travels. Chief among these was the famous library
			which he founded and which was enlarged by Abbot Ceolfrid. Here Bede
			acquired that wide and varied learning revealed in his historical,
			scientific, and theological works. He studied with particular care
			and reverence the patristic writings; his theological treatises were,
			as he says, <span class="tei tei-q">“compiled out of the works of the
			venerable Fathers.”</span> He must have had a considerable
			<!--Page xxxvi-->knowledge of
			Greek, probably he knew some Hebrew. Though he is not wholly free
			from the mediaeval churchman's distrust of pagan authors, he
			constantly betrays his acquaintance with them, and the sense of form
			which must unconsciously influence the student of classical
			literature has passed into his own writings and preserved him from
			the barbarism of monkish Latin. His style is singularly clear,
			simple, and fluent, as free from obscurity as from affectation and
			bombast.</p>
			<p>Thus was the
			foundation laid of that sound learning upon which his widespread
			influence both as a teacher and writer was reared. <span class="tei tei-q">“I always took delight,”</span> he tells us, <span class="tei tei-q">“in learning, or teaching, or writing.”</span> Probably
			his writing was, as is so often the case, the outcome of his
			teaching; his object in both is to meet <span class="tei tei-q">“the
			needs of the brethren.”</span> One of his pupils was Archbishop
			Egbert, the founder of the school of York, which gave a fresh impulse
			to learning, not only in England, but through Alcuin in France, at a
			time when a revival was most to be desired.</p>
			<p>It was to Egbert
			that he paid one of the only two visits which he records. In the
			<span class="tei tei-q">“Epistola ad Ecgbertum”</span> he alludes to
			a short stay he had made with him the year before, and declines, on
			account of the illness which proved to be his last, an invitation to
			visit him again. He visited Lindisfarne in connection with his task
			of writing the life of Cuthbert. Otherwise we have no authentic
			record of any absence from the monastery. The story that he went to
			Rome at the request of Pope Sergius, founded on a statement of
			William of Malmesbury, is now regarded as highly improbable. The
			oldest MS. of the letter of Sergius, requesting Ceolfrid to send one
			of his monks to Rome, has no mention of the name of Bede. If such an
			event had ever disturbed his accustomed course of life, it is
			inconceivable that he should nowhere allude to it. Still less is the
			assertion that he lived and taught at Cambridge one which need be
			seriously debated by the present generation.</p>
			<p>We may fairly
			assume that, except for a few short absences such as the visits to
			York and Lindisfarne, his <!--Page xxxvii-->whole life was spent in the monastery. It
			must have been a life of unremitting toil. His writings, numerous as
			they are, covering a wide range of subjects and involving the
			severest study, can only have been a part of his work; he had,
			besides, his duties as priest, teacher, and member of a religious
			community to fulfil. Even the manual labour of his literary work must
			have been considerable. He did not employ an amanuensis, and he had
			not the advantages with regard to copyists which a member of one of
			the larger monasteries might have had. <span class="tei tei-q">“Ipse
			mihi dictator simul notarius (= shorthand writer) et librarius (=
			copyist),”</span> he writes. Yet he never flags. Through all the
			outward monotony of his days his own interest remains fresh. He
			<span class="tei tei-q">“takes delight”</span> (<span class="tei tei-q">“dulce habui”</span>) in it all. It is a life full of
			eager activity in intellectual things, of a keen and patriotic
			interest in the wider life beyond the monastery walls, which shows
			itself sadly enough in his reflections on the evils of the times, of
			the ardent charity which spends itself in labour for the brethren,
			and, pervading the whole, that spirit of quiet obedience and devotion
			which his own simple words describe as <span class="tei tei-q">“the
			observance of monastic rule and the daily charge of singing in the
			Church.”</span> We can picture him, at the appointed hours, breaking
			off his absorbing occupations to take his place at the daily offices,
			lest, as he believed, he should fail to meet the angels there. Alcuin
			records a saying of his, <span class="tei tei-q">“I know that angels
			visit the canonical hours and the congregations of the brethren. What
			if they do not find me among the brethren? May they not say,
			<span class="tei tei-q">‘Where is Bede?’</span> ”</span></p>
			<p>It is probably
			here, in this harmony of work and devotion, that we may find the
			secret of the fascination in the record of his uneventful days. It
			reconciles the sharp antithesis between the active and the
			contemplative life. It seems to attain to that ideal of <span class="tei tei-q">“toil unsever'd from tranquillity”</span> which haunts us
			all, but which we have almost ceased to associate with the life of
			man under present conditions. Balance, moderation, or rather, that
			rare quality which has been well called <span class="tei tei-q">“the
			sanity of <!--Page xxxviii--> saintliness,”</span><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2" id="noteref-2" epub:type="noteref">2</a> these
			give a unity to the life of Bede and preserve him from the
			exaggerations of the conventual ideal. With all his admiration for
			the ascetic life, he recognizes human limitations. It is cheering to
			find that even he felt the need of a holiday. <span class="tei tei-q">“Having completed,”</span> he writes, <span class="tei tei-q">“the third book of the Commentary on Samuel, I thought I
			would rest awhile, and, after recovering in that way my delight in
			study and writing, proceed to take in hand the fourth.”</span>
			Intellectual power commands his homage, but his mind is open to the
			appreciation of all forms of excellence. It is the unlearned brother,
			unfit for study and occupied in manual labour, to whom, in his story,
			it is vouchsafed to hear the singing of the angels who came to summon
			Ceadda to his rest. The life of devotion ranks highest in his
			estimation, but he records with approval how St. Cuthbert thought
			<span class="tei tei-q">“that to afford the weak brethren the help of
			his exhortation stood in the stead of prayer, knowing that He Who
			said <span class="tei tei-q">‘Thou shalt love the Lord thy
			God,’</span> said likewise, <span class="tei tei-q">‘Thou shalt love
			thy neighbour as thyself.’</span> ”</span> He tells us how St.
			Gregory bewailed his own loss in being forced by his office to be
			entangled in worldly affairs. <span class="tei tei-q">“But,”</span>
			adds the human-hearted biographer, <span class="tei tei-q">“it
			behoves us to believe that he lost nothing of his monastic perfection
			by reason of his pastoral charge, but rather that he gained greater
			profit through the labour of converting many, than by the former calm
			of his private life.”</span> Yet he holds that this immunity from the
			evil influence of the world was chiefly due to Gregory's care in
			organizing his house like a monastery and safeguarding the
			opportunities for prayer and devotional study, even while he was
			immersed in affairs at the court of Constantinople, and afterwards,
			when he held the most onerous office in the Church.</p>
			<p>This quality of
			sanity shows itself again in an unusual degree of fairness to
			opponents. The Paschal error, indeed, moves his indignation in a
			manner which is incomprehensible <!--Page xxxix-->and distasteful to the modern reader, but even
			in the perverse and erring Celts he can recognize <span class="tei tei-q">“a zeal of God, though not according to
			knowledge.”</span> Aidan's holiness of life wins from him a warm
			tribute of admiration. In the monks of Iona, the stronghold of the
			Celtic system, he can perceive the fruit of good works and find an
			excuse for their error in their isolated situation. In the British
			Church it is the lack of missionary zeal, rather than their attitude
			towards the Easter question, which calls forth his strongest
			condemnation.</p>
			<p>A characteristic
			akin to this is his love of truth. As a historian, it shows itself in
			his scrupulous care in investigating evidence and in acknowledging
			the sources from which he draws. Nowhere is his intellectual honesty
			more apparent than in dealing with what he believes to be the
			miraculous element in his history. In whatever way we may regard
			these anecdotes, there can be no doubt that Bede took the utmost
			pains to assure himself of their authenticity. He is careful to
			acquire, if possible, first-hand evidence; where this cannot be
			obtained, he scrupulously mentions the lack of it. He admits only the
			testimony of witnesses of high character and generally quotes them by
			name.</p>
			<p>These are but a
			few of the glimpses afforded us of the personality of Bede, a
			personality never obtruded, but everywhere unconsciously revealed in
			his work. Everywhere we find the impress of a mind of wide
			intellectual grasp, a character of the highest saintliness, and a
			gentle refinement of thought and feeling. The lofty spirituality of
			Bede, his great learning and scholarly attainment are the more
			striking when we reflect how recently his nation had emerged from
			barbarism and received Christianity and the culture which it brought
			with it to these shores.</p>
			<p>The letter in
			which he declines Egbert's invitation on the plea of illness is dated
			November, 734. If we may assume that his death took place on the eve
			of Ascension Day in 735, no long period of enfeebled health clouded
			the close of his life, and weakness never interrupted his work. His
			death has been described by his pupil, Cuthbert, who afterwards
			became Abbot of Wearmouth and <!--Page xl-->Jarrow in succession to Huaetbert, in the
			letter quoted below. He was first buried at Jarrow but, according to
			Simeon of Durham, his relics were stolen by the priest, Elfred, and
			carried to Durham. In 1104, when the bones of Cuthbert were
			translated to the new Cathedral, those of Bede were found with them.
			Not long after, Hugh de Puisac erected a shrine of gold and silver,
			adorned with jewels, in which he placed them, along with the relics
			of many other saints. The shrine disappeared at the Reformation, and
			only the stone on which it rested remains.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3" id="noteref-3" epub:type="noteref">3</a></p>
			<header>
				<p>Letter of Cuthbert to Cuthwin</p>
			</header>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
			<p><span class="tei tei-q">“To his fellow-lector, Cuthwin, beloved in Christ,
			Cuthbert, his fellow-student, greeting and salvation for ever in
			the Lord. I have very gladly received the gift which thou sentest
			to me, and with much joy have read thy devout and learned letter,
			wherein I found that which I greatly desired, to wit, that masses
			and holy prayers are diligently offered by you for our father and
			master Bede, beloved of God. Wherefore I rejoice, rather for love
			of him than from confidence in my own power, to relate in few words
			after what manner he departed out of this world, understanding also
			that thou hast desired and asked this of me. He was troubled with
			weakness and chiefly with difficulty in breathing, yet almost
			without pain, for about a fortnight before the day of our Lord's
			Resurrection; and thus he afterwards passed his time, cheerful and
			rejoicing, giving thanks to Almighty God every day and night, nay,
			every hour, till the day of our Lord's Ascension, to wit, the
			twenty-sixth day of May, and daily gave lessons to us, his
			disciples; and whatsoever remained of the day he spent in singing
			psalms, as far as he was able; he also strove to pass all the night
			joyfully in prayer and thanksgiving to God, save only when a short
			sleep prevented it; and then he no sooner awoke than he straightway
			began again to repeat the well-known sacred songs, and ceased not
			to give thanks <!--Page xli-->
			to God with uplifted hands. I declare with truth that I have never
			seen with my eyes, or heard with my ears, any man so earnest in
			giving thanks to the living God. O truly blessed man! He repeated
			the words of St. Paul the Apostle, <span class="tei tei-q">‘It is a
			fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God,’</span> and
			much more out of Holy Scripture; wherein also he admonished us to
			think of our last hour, and to arise out of the sleep of the soul;
			and being learned in our native poetry, he said also in our tongue,
			concerning the dread parting of souls from the body:</span></p>
			<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
			<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
			<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
			<span style="font-size: 90%">Fore then neidfaerae</span>
			</div>
			<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
			<span style="font-size: 90%">naenig uiuurthit</span>
			</div>
			<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
			<span style="font-size: 90%">thonc suotturra</span>
			</div>
			<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
			<span style="font-size: 90%">than him tharf sie</span>
			</div>
			<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
			<span style="font-size: 90%">to ymb hycggannae</span>
			</div>
			<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
			<span style="font-size: 90%">aer his hin iongae</span>
			</div>
			<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
			<span style="font-size: 90%">huaet his gastae</span>
			</div>
			<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
			<span style="font-size: 90%">godaes aeththa yflaes</span>
			</div>
			<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
			<span style="font-size: 90%">aefter deothdaege</span>
			</div>
			<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
			<span style="font-size: 90%">doemid uueorthae.</span>
			</div>
			</div>
			</div>
			<p>Which being
			interpreted is: <span class="tei tei-q">“Before the inevitable
			journey hence, no man is wiser than is needful that he may
			consider, ere the soul departs, what good or evil it hath done and
			how it shall be judged after its departure.”</span></p>
			<p><span class="tei tei-q">“He also sang antiphons for our comfort and his own.
			One of these is, <span class="tei tei-q">‘O King of Glory, Lord of
			all power, Who, triumphing this day, didst ascend above all the
			heavens, leave us not comfortless, but send to us the promise of
			the Father, even the Spirit of Truth—Hallelujah.’</span> And when
			he came to the words, <span class="tei tei-q">‘leave us not
			comfortless,’</span> he burst into tears and wept much. And an hour
			after, he fell to repeating what he had begun. And this he did the
			whole day, and we, hearing it, mourned with him and wept. Now we
			read and now we lamented, nay, we wept even as we read. In such
			rapture we passed the fifty days' festival<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4" id="noteref-4" epub:type="noteref">4</a> till
			the aforesaid day; and he rejoiced greatly and gave God thanks,
			because he had been accounted worthy to suffer such weakness. And
			he often said, <span class="tei tei-q">‘God scourgeth every son
			whom He <!--Page xlii--> receiveth’</span>; and the words of St.
			Ambrose, <span class="tei tei-q">‘I have not so lived as to be
			ashamed to live among you; but neither do I fear to die, because we
			have a merciful Lord.’</span> And during those days, besides the
			lessons we had daily from him, and the singing of the Psalms, there
			were two memorable works, which he strove to finish; to wit, his
			translation of the Gospel of St. John, from the beginning, as far
			as the words, <span class="tei tei-q">‘But what are they among so
			many?’</span> into our own tongue, for the benefit of the Church of
			God; and some selections from the books of Bishop Isidore, saying,
			<span class="tei tei-q">‘I would not have my boys read a lie, nor
			labour herein without profit after my death.’</span></span></p>
			<p><span class="tei tei-q">“When the Tuesday before the Ascension of our Lord
			came, he began to suffer still more in his breathing, and there was
			some swelling in his feet. But he went on teaching all that day and
			dictating cheerfully, and now and then said among other things,
			<span class="tei tei-q">‘Learn quickly, I know not how long I shall
			endure, and whether my Maker will not soon take me away.’</span>
			But to us it seemed that haply he knew well the time of his
			departure; and so he spent the night, awake, in giving of thanks.
			And when the morning dawned, that is, on the Wednesday, he bade us
			write with all speed what we had begun. And this we did until the
			third hour. And from the third hour we walked in procession with
			the relics of the saints, according to the custom of that
			day.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5" id="noteref-5" epub:type="noteref">5</a> And
			there was one of us with him who said to him, <span class="tei tei-q">‘There is still one chapter wanting of the book which
			thou hast been dictating, but I deem it burdensome for thee to be
			questioned any further.’</span> He answered, <span class="tei tei-q">‘Nay, it is light, take thy pen and make ready, and
			write quickly.’</span> And this was done. But at the ninth hour he
			said to me, <span class="tei tei-q">‘I have certain treasures in my
			coffer, some spices, napkins and incense; run quickly and bring the
			priests of our monastery to me, that I may distribute among them
			the gifts which God has bestowed on me.’</span> And this I did
			trembling, and when they were come, he spoke to every one of them,
			admonishing and entreating them <!--Page xliii-->that they should diligently offer masses and
			prayers for him, and they promised readily. But they all mourned
			and wept, sorrowing most of all for the words which he spake,
			because they thought that they should see his face no long time in
			this world. But they rejoiced for that he said, <span class="tei tei-q">‘It is time for me, if it be my Maker's will, to be set
			free from the flesh, and come to Him Who, when as yet I was not,
			formed me out of nothing. I have lived long; and well has my
			pitiful judge disposed my life for me; the time of my release is at
			hand; for my soul longs to see Christ my King in His
			beauty.’</span> Having said this and much more for our profit and
			edification, he passed his last day in gladness till the evening;
			and the aforesaid boy, whose name was Wilbert, still said,
			<span class="tei tei-q">‘Dear master, there is yet one sentence not
			written.’</span> He answered, <span class="tei tei-q">‘It is well,
			write it.’</span> Soon after, the boy said, <span class="tei tei-q">‘Now it is written.’</span> And he said, <span class="tei tei-q">‘It is well, thou hast said truly, it is finished. Take
			my head in thy hands, for I rejoice greatly to sit facing my holy
			place where I was wont to pray, that I too, sitting there, may call
			upon my Father.’</span> And thus on the pavement of his little
			cell, chanting <span class="tei tei-q">‘Glory be to the Father, and
			to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost,’</span> and the rest, he
			breathed his last.</span></p>
			<p><span class="tei tei-q">“And without doubt we must believe that inasmuch as he
			had always been devout and earnest on earth in the praise of God,
			his soul was carried by angels to the joys of Heaven which he
			desired. And all who heard him or beheld the death of our father
			Bede, said that they had never seen any other end his life in so
			great devotion and peace. For, as thou hast heard, so long as the
			soul abode in the body, he chanted the <span class="tei tei-q">‘Gloria Patri’</span> and other words to the glory of
			God, and with outstretched hands ceased not to give thanks to
			God.</span></p>
			<p><span class="tei tei-q">“But know this, that much could be told and written
			concerning him, but my want of learning cuts short my words.
			Nevertheless, with the help of God, I purpose at leisure to write
			more fully concerning him, of those things which I saw with my own
			eyes and heard with my own ears.”</span></p>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
